==PAGE:1==
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
Embracing Production AI Workloads
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electronic and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
Embracing Production AI Workloads
Master Thesis
September, 2025
By
Eduardo Miranda
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electronic and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Bygning 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Communication Tech­
nologies, Department of Electronic and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Kubernetes and cloud
computing principals.
Eduardo Miranda ­ s223113
Signature
Date
ii
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Businesses are increasingly turning to cloud computing as the demand for cost­effective,
scalable, and flexible applications grows. A number of cloud computing paradigms have
evolved as a result of this growth, but all of them share a common concern: scalability and
resiliency. One of the solutions to this challenge has been the adoption of serverless archi­
tectures, as these not only enable developers to concentrate more on creating business
value and less on infrastructure management [1], but also automatically scale or substi­
tute failing compute resources as necessary. However, while abstracting infrastructure
management and offering on­demand compute are key benefits, they don’t completely
solve the problem of scalability and resiliency. It becomes increasingly important to make
sure applications can scale to accommodate to an increasing user base while being re­
silient to failures, and in order to understand how do build and design our systems to be
able to handle the ”cracks”, it is also important to understand their components, their lim­
its and how they work ”under the hood” [2]. My master thesis, titled ”Ensuring Resilience
in Enterprise Cloud: Embracing Production AI Workloads”, aims to explore how to de­
sign scalable, resilient and portable systems on the cloud, using Amazon Web Services
(AWS) as a case study, by analyzing and understanding various services and their tech­
nicalities, while ensuring that applications not only can scale but also recover quickly and
gracefully from unexpected disruptions. This work will be developed in collaboration with
Novo Nordisk, alongside a team of Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions developers, with the
goal of scaling a central AI platform within the organization, from testing to full production
deployment.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Eduardo Miranda, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
First, I would like to thank my supervisors at DTU and Novo Nordisk ­ Lars Staalha­
gen, Akanksha Verma, and Anders Mortensen ­ for their encouragement and guidance
throughout my thesis.
I would also like to thank to my colleagues I had the pleasure to work with over almost two
years in the company ­ Alyson Dalby, Jasper Hahn, Samuel Branisa, Sebastian Skøtt,
Feisal Adur and Lasse Jensen ­ whose support made this entire project possible.
On a personal note, I would like to thank my family for believing in me unconditionally,
pushing me on this opportunity to chase my dream and supporting me during this entire
journey. To my friends, with a special dedication to Ari, who shared this whole master’s
experience with me and to João, for showing me the computer science world for the first
time. Last but not least, I would like to thank my beautiful girlfriend, who stayed by my
side throughout two years of hard work from 2500km away.
iv
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Analysis
3
2.1
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Resiliency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Cloud Agnosticism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Continuous Integration and Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Cloud Architecture Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Infrastructure Architecture
13
3.1
Traditional Cloud Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Proposed Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.1
Orchestration Layer Architecture and Components . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.2
Cloud Infrastructure Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Component Justification and Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3.1
ArgoCD: The GitOps Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3.2
Crossplane: Cloud­Agnostic Infrastructure Provisioning . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Workflow and Operational Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.1
Development and Deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.2
Continuous Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Key Advantages and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5.1
Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.6
Implementation Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Implementation
23
4.1
Primary Building Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Supporting Tools and Services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Example Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Execution of the Proposed Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4.1
Local Deployment Phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4.2
Cloud Deployment Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Cloud Provider Migration
47
5.1
A Migration Novel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Vendor Lock­In and US Dependency on Cloud Providers
49
6.1
Understanding Vendor Lock­In in Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Geopolitical Implications of US Cloud Dominance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Mitigation Strategies and the Role of GitOps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.4
Implications for Modern Infrastructure Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Future Works
53
7.1
Project Restructuring for Enhanced Modularity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.2
Leveraging Crossplane 2.0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.3
Cloud Architecture Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
8
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
58
vi
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The rapid adoption of cloud computing has completely changed how organizations de­
sign, deploy, and manage modern applications. Cloud providers such as AWS, Google
Cloud Platform (GCP) or Microsoft Azure provide exceptional access to scalable com­
puter resources. This allows companies to build applications that can dynamically adapt
to changing demands without having to worry about maintaining physical infrastructure.
Due to this adoption, enterprise­grade computing resources are now more widely ac­
cessible, enabling businesses of all sizes to take use of global infrastructure, managed
services, and distributed systems that would have been too expensive to develop and
operate internally. However, as more organizations expand their use of the cloud, it’s
becoming clear that this shift brings its own set of challenges. Traditional approaches of
managing cloud infrastructure often create bottlenecks that make it harder to scale or stay
resilient. Scalability issues often come from inflexible architectures that cannot adapt ef­
ficiently to changing workloads, along with manual provisioning processes that introduce
delays and inconsistencies. These limitations stand out when applications experience
rapid growth or unpredictable traffic patterns, where the infrastructure’s ability to scale
horizontally becomes critical to maintaining performance and availability. Resilience is
another significant challenge in cloud environments. The lack of proper infrastructure
orchestration and monitoring can severely impact system reliability, leading to extended
outages and performance issues. Traditional infrastructure management methods often
depend on manual intervention for failure recovery, creating single points of failure and in­
creasing mean time to recovery. Furthermore, the distributed nature of cloud applications
introduces additional complexity to keep everything in sync across different components,
regions, and services, making it difficult to implement effective disaster recovery strate­
gies.
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tools like Terraform, AWS Cloud Development Kit (CDK), and
Azure Resource Manager (ARM) were developed to address some of these challenges
by enabling programmatic infrastructure management. These tools allow infrastructure
to be defined, versioned, and deployed through code, providing better consistency and
repeatability compared to manual provisioning. However, traditional IaC approaches still
face significant limitations when it comes to achieving true scalability and resilience. The
imperative nature of many IaC tools requires explicit management of resource lifecycle
and dependencies, leading to complex state management issues and potential configura­
tion drift over time. Moreover, these tools often create tight coupling between infrastruc­
ture definitions and specific cloud providers, resulting in vendor lock­in that limits strategic
flexibility and complicates multi­cloud or hybrid cloud strategies.
The emergence of GitOps and Kubernetes has introduced new paradigms that address
many of these traditional limitations. GitOps, a operational model that uses Git reposito­
ries as the single source of truth for infrastructure and application configurations, enables
declarative infrastructure management where the desired state is continuously reconciled
with the actual state. This approach has some clear advantages over traditional IaC meth­
ods:
• Uses familiar Git workflows to manage infrastructure
• Automatically spots and fixes drift
• Keeps a full history of all changes for easy tracking and audits
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
1
==PAGE:10==
The declarative nature of GitOps helps cutting out a lot of the state management chal­
lenges you get with imperative IaC tools, as the system ensures all resources match the
desired state, rather than running through all instructions sequentially. Kubernetes has
become the go­to platform for managing containerized apps at scale, making it a natural fit
for this kind of setup. Its declarative Application Program Interface (API) model aligns per­
fectly with GitOps principles, enabling infrastructure and application management through
the same unified interface. Kubernetes comes with built­in features like horizontal scal­
ing, service discovery, load balancing, and self­healing — all of which help tackle the
scalability and resilience issues that often affect traditional cloud apps. The platform’s ex­
tensive ecosystem of operators and Custom Resource Definitions (XRDs) allows for the
management of complex infrastructure components using the same Kubernetes APIs,
creating opportunities for more unified and consistent operational models. Despite these
advances, organizations still face the challenge of vendor lock­in when deploying cloud­
native applications. While Kubernetes provides portability for application workloads, the
underlying infrastructure—including managed services, networking configurations, and
storage solutions—often remains tightly coupled to specific cloud providers. This limita­
tion contradicts the principles of building truly scalable and resilient systems, which should
be portable and adaptable across different environments to ensure long­term architectural
integrity and operational independence.
This thesis addresses these challenges by introducing and implementing an innovative
Kubernetes­based architecture using a unified GitOps strategy, addressing the scalabil­
ity and resiliency issues. The research focuses on developing a dual­cluster approach
that enables consistent development experiences across local and cloud environments,
providing quick feedback loops, utilizing tools like ArgoCD for GitOps orchestration and
Crossplane for cloud­agnostic infrastructure provisioning. By abstracting infrastructure
definitions from provider­specific implementations, this architecture enables the creation
of systems that scale dynamically, recover automatically and deploy consistently across
any cloud provider, improving independence from vendor­specific solutions. The practical
component of this work involves implementing the Kubernetes Driven Infrastructure (KDI)
architecture, a comprehensive infrastructure template that demonstrates these principles
in action.
Through this implementation, the thesis will investigate how cloud­agnostic infrastructure
abstractions impact scalability and resiliency in cloud­native environments, examining the
performance and operational trade­offs of an abstraction­layer implementation. Through
this implementation, the thesis will investigate how to achieve scalability and resiliency
in cloud­native environments through cloud­agnostic infrastructure abstractions, examin­
ing the operational trade­offs of an abstraction­layer implementation. The research will
provide empirical evidence on the effectiveness of this approach compared to traditional
cloud infrastructure management methods, contributing to the broader understanding of
how to build scalable, resilient and portable cloud­native systems that adapt to organiza­
tional requirements, rather than restricting them.
2
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem Analysis
Building scalable, resilient and cloud­agnostic applications requires a careful analysis of
several technical and operational challenges that limit the capabilities of a system in pro­
duction. While Kubernetes has emerged as the standard for container orchestration, cre­
ating truly robust and portable applications involves much more than simply deploying
containers to a cluster. This chapter examines some of the core requirements today’s
cloud applications should address to ensure their success in modern cloud ecosystems.
Through analyzing real world applications, together with investigation in this field, it was
possible to identify five critical requirements that build a solid foundation for a solid cloud
architecture: scalability, resiliency, cloud agnosticism, networking and Continuous Inte­
gration/Continuous Delivery (CI/CD).
Each of these requirements has it’s set of challenges when working with a Kubernetes­
based architecture. Scalability isn’t just about handling more users, it’s about doing so
efficiently while maintaining performance and cost­effectiveness. Resiliency goes beyond
basic fault tolerance to include graceful degradation and rapid recovery across distributed
systems. Cloud agnosticism ensures that architectural decisions don’t lock teams into
specific vendor ecosystems, while robust networking capabilities enable secure and effi­
cient communication both within clusters and across hybrid environments. CI/CD setups,
often the last component to be configured, becomes particularly complex in Kubernetes
environments where infrastructure and application code needs to be orchestrated simul­
taneously. Together, these requirements intersect and influence each other in ways that
can either amplify an architecture’s strengths or compound its weaknesses.
The following sections will break down each requirement individually, diving into their prac­
tical significance and exploring how they shape the design decisions that will ultimately
define the foundation of the proposed solution.
2.1
Scalability
The term scalability covers several distinct concepts. There are three main types of scal­
ability to consider [3]:
• Horizontal scalability ­ also known as scale­out, it refers to the capacity of adding
more instances of the same resource to a cloud application. An example of horizon­
tal scalability can be adding more Pods (replicas) to a Kubernetes cluster. This type
of scalability is often used when there’s a need for an application to handle large
volumes of traffic. The core benefit of horizontal scalability comes from its capacity
to improve processing capabilities and overall performance by dividing workloads
among various resources.
• Vertical scalability ­ also known as scale­up, it refers to the ability of increasing the
resource capacity to an existing instance. An example of vertical scalability can
be adding more CPU cores, memory or storage to an existing server. The main
strength of vertical scalability is, in some situations, how it improves the utilization
of available resources, helping organizations cut costs while reducing unnecessary
waste.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
3
==PAGE:12==
• Hybrid scalability ­ also known as diagonal scaling, it combines both types men­
tioned above. It allows to add more instances to an existing cloud application, while
improving the resources on the existing ones, in order to achieve maximum per­
formance. Hybrid scalability is common in applications with complex workloads,
requiring a combination of both power and capacity.
Designing and building scalable applications can provide businesses with numerous ben­
efits:
• Cost optimization ­ Represents a fundamental advantage of cloud computing, where
organizations pay only for the resources they actually utilize, avoiding expensive bills
on idle resources.
• Flexibility and performance improvement ­ Represent another key aspects of cloud­
native applications, as they are able to dynamically scale resources up or down
based on real­time workload requirements, ensuring consistent performance during
peak usage periods without over­provisioning during quieter times. This elasticity
allows enterprises to respond quickly to market demands while optimizing resource
allocation to match actual performance needs rather than planning for static capac­
ity.
• Availability ­ As one of the primary key metrics on modern cloud solutions, scalabil­
ity has a significant impact on availability by enabling workload distribution across
multiple resources, reducing the risk of downtime and ensuring applications remain
consistently accessible. This becomes especially important for mission­critical ap­
plications that demand high availability and reliability standards.
Although Kubernetes offers support for all types of scalability mentioned above, horizontal
scaling is the primary scaling method for Kubernetes applications, with the Horizontal Pod
Autoscaler (HPA) acting as the main mechanism for automatically adjusting pod replicas
based on demand. This is a Kubernetes native feature that, according to the official doc­
umentation, ”horizontal pods scaling responds to increased load is to deploy more Pods
and if the load decreases and the number of Pods is above the configured minimum, the
HorizontalPodAutoscaler instructs the workload resource to scale back down.” [4].
As highlighted in the paper Server Scalability Using Kubernetes (Dewi et al.) [5] as the
result of a study conducted at the Faculty of Industrial Technology Petra Christian Univer­
sity, where an academical services application was deployed on the institution on a single
server and a Kubernetes cluster with HPA and thoroughly tested via script simulating the
access of 8000 users over 2 different scenarios, it was possible to reduce CPU usage
(in millicores) during user access to the Kubernetes cluster by 59%, compared to the sin­
gle server configuration. However, despite enhancing resource efficiency and application
responsiveness, autoscaling introduced some overhead due to container startup times
and synchronization delays, which resulted on slightly higher response times. Nonethe­
less, by intelligently managing mechanisms such as setting minimum and maximum pod
counts, Kubernetes facilitated a scalable deployment that was able adapt to fluctuating
workloads, independent of the underlying infrastructure.
Another horizontal scaling mechanism used in Kubernetes applications with heavier work­
loads by default or containing nodes that cannot allocate more pods, new nodes can be
automatically added to the cluster in order to accommodate all pods. This setup is partic­
ularly useful when combined with HPA, in applications that handle large volumes of pods,
ensuring that pods are scheduled. The benefits of such capabilities can be described
on the third chapter of the book Knowledge Production and Management in Africa [6],
4
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:13==
written by Adedeji Ogungbola. The book ”explores knowledge production and manage­
ment across diverse African contexts, integrating indigenous perspectives with modern
technological advancements”, and Ogungbola explains how technologies like Docker and
Kubernetes, due to their flexibility and cost­effectiveness, attract not only startups but well
established companies in a continent that often faces issues with network connectivity,
infrastructure, among others.
It is important to note that, despite being the primary scalability strategy in Kubernetes,
horizontal scaling doesn’t fit all scenarios, as some components may not behave as ex­
pected when dealing with distributed workloads. A practical example where vertical scal­
ing is preferred over horizontal scaling involves stateful applications with persistent stor­
age requirements. When a database component uses Persistent Volume Claim (PVC)
that only support single­writer access modes, connecting multiple pods to the same stor­
age becomes impossible without risking data corruption or loss. In such scenarios, verti­
cally scaling the existing pod’s resources provides a safer approach than attempting hor­
izontal distribution. Valkey is an example of this challenge, where setting up distributed
clusters presents significant technical challenges compared to Redis, making vertical scal­
ability the better solution for resource scaling.
2.2
Resiliency
In modern cloud environments, system failures are inevitable, making resilience a core
requirement for maintaining service availability and trust among users. Unlike scalability,
which has clearly defined types and mechanisms, resilience in Kubernetes is achieved
through a distinct set of features and configurations working together, such as:
• ReplicaSets ­ ”A ReplicaSet ensures that a specified number of pod replicas are
running at any given time” [4]. It continuously monitors the current number of running
pods that match its selector and compares it to the desired replica count. When
there’s a mismatch, it takes necessary actions. ReplicaSets are enabled by default
when the number of replicas is specified on the correspondent field, and managed
by Deployments.
• Load balancing ­ Kubernetes Services act as an internal load balancer that dis­
tributes traffic across multiple healthy pod replicas, using round­robin by default.
When calling a Service in Kubernetes, it will automatically direct traffic to the avail­
able healthy pods without worrying about which specific pod will handle the request.
Kubernetes offers two main approaches for load balancing: the traditional method
uses iptables, where kube­proxy monitors the cluster and sets up routing rules that
capture traffic destined for a Service and redirect it to one of the backend Pods. It’s
reliable and relatively lightweight since it leverages Linux’s built­in networking capa­
bilities. The more advanced option is IPVS, which operates at the kernel level and
uses more efficient data structures like hash tables. This approach delivers better
performance(lower latency and higher throughput) compared to iptables, making it
particularly useful for clusters handling heavy traffic loads.
• Pod restart policies ­ Restart policies define how Kubernetes should proceed when
a Pod in the cluster fails. There are 3 policies to manage Pods in case of fail­
ure: ”Always”, which automatically restarts containers independently of their exit
status, ”OnFailure”, which restarts containers only when they exit with an error code
and ”Never”, meaning that Kubernetes won’t automatically restart failing contain­
ers. Restart policies are enabled by default, with Deployments following an ”Always”
strategy and Jobs an ”OnFailure” one. However, these policies can be further cus­
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
5
==PAGE:14==
tomized according to the requirements of each application.
• Rolling updates ­ A rolling update allows ”Deployments’ update to take place with
zero downtime by incrementally updating Pods instances with new ones” [4]. When
a rolling update happens, the new pods are scheduled on Nodes with available
resources and Kubernetes waits for those new Pods to start before removing the
old ones. As the update happens, the Service load balances traffic only to available
Pods. Rolling updates are enabled by default.
• Resources requests and limits ­ these settings define how much CPU and memory
a container can use. Requests specify the minimum amount of resources guar­
anteed to a container, while limits set the maximum amount of resources it can
consume. This setting is not enabled by default, and can be tailored to each appli­
cation’s needs.
• Health checks (probes) ­ Health checks are a mechanism that enable Kubernetes
to monitor the status of the applications running within Pods, allowing other compo­
nents to adapt and fix the current issues, such as traffic redirection and pod replace­
ment. In Kubernetes, there are 3 types of health checks (probes): readiness probes,
which inform Kubernetes when the app is ready to serve traffic; liveness probes,
which inform Kubernetes of the state of the application, not only on an availability
level, as probes are able to catch a deadlock when an application is running but
unable to make progress; and startup probes, which are used to determine when
an application within a container has started successfully, helping managing the
startup process by delaying liveness and readiness checks until the application is
fully initialized. This type of check is specially useful when deploying slow­starting
applications, helping avoiding them getting killed by the kubelet before they are up
and running. Health checks are not enabled by default, and can also be tailored
to each application’s needs, by configuring parameters like the commands used for
the health check, initial delay, period and failing threshold enabling a smooth check
on the applications’ status.
The HPA mechanism also plays a role in system resiliency. Due to it’s capabilities of auto­
matic scaling as a response to increasing workloads, this also contributes to the availability
of the system by maintaining it during unexpected traffic spikes, therefore preventing ser­
vice degradation. As mentioned on the list above, some of this features are available by
default, while others need to be specifically configured. It is important to note that despite
Kubernetes’ resilience capabilities, when addressing resilience, in order to achieve a ro­
bust solution the orchestration layer should not be the single point of focus. The underlying
cloud infrastructure plays a significant role in the overall system resilience, with specific
factors such as availability zone distribution and network reliability directly impacting ap­
plication availability and recovery capabilities. The importance of establishing a robust
cloud infrastructure architecture in relation to the orchestration layer will be analyzed in
detail in the final section of this chapter.
It is also important to note that, despite the efficiency of such mechanisms, specially when
combined with a well established cloud architecture, there are a few limitation when de­
tecting some failure scenarios. As analyzed on the paper A Study on the Aging and Fault
Tolerance of Microservices in Kubernetes (Flora et al.) [7], probes lack the sensitivity for
detecting more subtle or gradual failures, known as software aging. These issues, charac­
terized by resource leaks, performance degradation, or gradual resource exhaustion, are
exceptionally difficult to detect early, as probes only react when these failures become
critical and are manifested as total unavailability. This represents a serious limitation
6
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:15==
when deploying Kubernetes­based applications for high­availability systems, where soft­
ware aging can impact service quality, recovery strategies, and cost management. This
research, together with similar studies like the one presented on the paper Resilience
Evaluation of Kubernetes in Cloud­Edge Environments via Failure Injection (Chen et al.)
[8] suggest the usage of proactive detection mechanisms, mainly fault injection, to simu­
late failure conditions and evaluate and optimize the robustness of the Kubernetes appli­
cations.
2.3
Cloud Agnosticism
Cloud agnosticism has become an increasingly crucial topic in the current situation, of­
fering organizations significant strategic flexibility, avoiding one of the biggest blockers in
modern cloud development, vendor lock­in. By avoiding this, companies gain a significant
leverage when negotiating for better terms, adapting to changing business requirements,
optimizing costs on providers or even use multiple ones, leveraging the strengths of each
provider without being constrained to a single ecosystem. Cloud agnosticism also im­
pacts resiliency. Through a well­defined recovery strategy, it enables companies to shift
their workloads to different providers with minimal friction during outages or service dis­
ruptions. While cloud agnosticism isn’t the primary focus of this work, it’s worth noting that
due to recent geopolitical tensions, particularly those involving the United States, a dedi­
cated chapter later in this work will explore the importance of cloud agnosticism in greater
depth, examining how current global dynamics highlight the importance of remaining plat­
form independent.
In the current technological space, achieving true cloud agnosticism represents a signif­
icant challenge, if not possible, due to significant differences between cloud providers’
operational models and services. IaC tools represent some significant progress in this
area, providing development teams a centralized way to define infrastructure, communi­
cating with different cloud providers through standardized APIs and declarative configu­
rations, abstracting some of the provider’s specific complexity. However, these tools are
still bound to cloud providers at some level, due to the different API specifications each
platform uses for creating infrastructure. Nevertheless, companies are able to achieve
significant levels of platform independence through well defined architectures and ab­
straction layers.
One abstraction layer suggested in the paper A Cloud­Agnostic Container Orchestrator
for Improving Interoperability (Elliott et al.) [9] is a system which acts as a middleware
between the orchestrator and the desired cloud providers, supporting the regular con­
tainer orchestrating tasks such as deployment, monitoring and live migration across cloud
platforms by executing Remote Procedure Calls (RPC). This component works at a sys­
tem level, allowing not only to deploy containers on diverse cloud platforms but also on­
premise hardware, abstracting the underlying differences through a centralized orches­
trator and standardized interfaces. The diagram below demonstrates how the system
interacts with multiple hosts through the unified orchestrator.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Cloud­agnostic Container Orchestrator Workflow Diagram
By orchestrating containers at a lower­level, supporting standard container runtimes com­
patible with the Open Container Initiative (OCI) and providing migration capabilities through
application state transferring, this component proves to be closer to be truly cloud agnos­
tic than any other infrastructure management tool. However, even if such a tool existed
beyond the conceptual level, it would limit interactions with the providers, as it’s focused
on managing containers across platforms. While useful for it’s purpose, infrastructure
orchestration involves interacting with many more components.
Despite not working directly at the system level, a more modern approach to infrastruc­
ture management that enables communication with multiple cloud providers and resource
management through Kubernetes’ battle­tested APIs is the use of control planes. The pri­
mary function of control planes is to reconcile the state of it’s data plane with a desired
state. The information about the desired state is passed to Crossplane through API calls
made via Composite Resource (XR). A Composite Resource represents a collection of
Kubernetes resources as a single Kubernetes object. These are instantiated when users
interact with custom APIs, known as Composite Resource Definition (XRD). Despite it’s
higher level approach, control planes allow to structure their resources through the cre­
ation of custom APIs, therefore providing a unified way for teams to establish consistent
standards when working with specific resources. This becomes particularly useful when
working in multi­cloud environments, which enable the centralization of common prop­
erties between resources in a single place, regardless of the underlying API differences
between providers. An example of this control plane architecture is Crossplane, which
extends Kubernetes to manage infrastructure resources across multiple cloud providers
through native Kubernetes APIs and custom resource definitions.
8
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Networking
While networking serves as the foundation of a robust architecture, enabling other key
requirements such as scalability and resiliency to function effectively, it also representing
one of the most critical components that requires careful architectural design and config­
uration. Regardless of the importance of networking on all layers of an application, this
analysis will cover only the orchestration layer, as the cloud infrastructure architecture
analysis will be covered in detail in the final section of this chapter.
Kubernetes networking is designed to ensure communication between pods, services,
and external resources within a Kubernetes cluster. Networking represents a central part
of Kubernetes, but it represents a big challenge when understanding exactly how it is
expected to work. The official documentation addresses four main types of networking
[4]:
• Container­to­container communications ­ Inside a single Pod, containers share the
same network namespace, which means they use the same IP address and can
communicate with each other through localhost. This shared networking environ­
ment keeps each Pod’s traffic isolated while making inter­container communication
within the Pod simple and direct.
• Pod­to­Pod communications ­ Each Node in Kubernetes gets its own range of IP
addresses to assign to Pods, which guarantees that every Pod has a unique IP
visible cluster­wide. This eliminates IP conflicts and allows Pods to communicate
directly using real IP addresses, whether they’re on the same Node or distributed
across different Nodes throughout the cluster.
• Pod­to­Service communications ­ Pods scale up and down with demand, get recre­
ated after crashes, or move around when nodes fail. All this movement means Pod
IP addresses are constantly changing, which would normally create a networking
disaster. Kubernetes handles this challenge through Services, which act like stable
intermediaries. A Service provides a fixed virtual IP address that stays constant
even when the backend Pods behind it are shifting around. It also handles load
balancing, distributing incoming traffic across all the healthy Pods associated with
that Service.
• External­to­Service communications ­ Kubernetes offers two main ways to handle
network connections between applications and the outside world. Egress deals with
outbound traffic, making sure pods can reach external resources. It uses iptables for
source NAT translation, so requests look like they’re coming from the node rather
than each individual pod. Ingress, on the other hand, manages incoming traffic,
applying rules that allow or block specific requests from external sources to internal
services. In practice, ingress is usually handled in two ways: through service load
balancers, which work at the network layer to distribute traffic, or through ingress
controllers, which operate higher up the stack to provide more advanced routing and
policy features.
Despite the fact that Kubernetes configures some of these network types by default, it al­
lows for specific configurations on all types, with the most common modifications typically
occurring at the Pod­to­Pod and external­to­service communication levels, through Con­
tainer Network Interface (CNI) and ingress configurations, respectively. However, relying
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
9
==PAGE:18==
exclusively on default configurations introduces potential risks, particularly in terms of se­
curity. As analyzed on the paper Understanding the Security Implications of Kubernetes
Networking (Minna et al.) [10], standard network policies in Kubernetes primarily control
layer 3 (IP­based) traffic between pods, but attacks over trusted IP addresses can only be
detected with layer 7 (application­layer) filtering, which requires additional components.
It is crucial to implement a robust ingress configuration, together with additional traffic fil­
tering, in order to properly manage the traffic coming from the outside, in order to prevent
possible attack vectors.
Another key challenge comes from how NetworkPolicies work in practice. As described on
the chapter 8 named Networking in Kubernetes of the book Kubernetes Recipes (Stencel
and Berton) [11], while Kubernetes enables to define security rules, it’s entirely up to the
CNI plugin being used to enforce them. This means that not all plugins provide the same
level of support; for instance, some widely used CNIs, such as Flannel, do not enforce
NetworkPolicies by default, or may only support ingress but not egress rules. In contrast,
plugins like Calico, Cilium, or Weave provide more comprehensive policy enforcement,
including both ingress and egress filtering.
2.5
Continuous Integration and Delivery
CI/CD represents an extensive field with multiple strategies and development tools avail­
able for automating workflows. In repositories containing both applications and orches­
tration layers, it becomes crucial to define a robust strategy that can automate the entire
deployment process across these two distinct components. However, this section will
focus specifically on the orchestration layer.
While Kubernetes is commonly integrated with traditional CI/CD solutions offered by plat­
forms like GitHub and GitLab, there’s been a notable shift toward GitOps methodologies,
where repositories serve as the single source of truth for managing infrastructure and
application state. GitOps is an operational framework that implements Continuous De­
ployment for cloud native applications. The primary idea of GitOps is to have declarative
descriptions of the current desired state for the infrastructure in a centralized place (a
repository) alongside an automated process that ensures that the desired state in the
repository matches the current state of the deployed system. To update these resources,
it is only necessary to push changes to the repository, and the defined process automati­
cally handles deploying the current desired state. By establishing such workflow, GitOps
ensures consistency, traceability, and reproducibility of configurations across multiple en­
vironments, while significantly reducing manual intervention and the risk of human error.
As analyzed on the paper Automating telecom software deployment with GitOps (Wörn­
dle et al.) [12], the adoption of GitOps principles on the telecom industry has provided
significant advantages to Communication Service Providers (CSPs) making it possible
to quickly introduce new features and updates that open up new business opportunities,
improve efficiency and proactively address security threats.
2.6
Cloud Architecture Impact
As outlined on previous sections, the orchestration layer should not be the single point
of focus when addressing the problems outlined above. The underlying cloud infrastruc­
10
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:19==
ture plays a significant role in the overall system with specific factors directly impact­
ing Kubernetes­based application across various dimensions. However, without a well­
architected network foundation, even the most elaborate scaling strategies become inef­
fective, and resilience mechanisms fail to deliver their intended protection. The underly­
ing networking configurations directly influence how applications can scale horizontally,
how traffic can be distributed across availability zones, and how gracefully the system re­
sponds to component failures. The complexity deepens when considering that network­
ing decisions made early in the deployment process tend to be the most difficult to modify
later. Unlike compute resources that can be dynamically adjusted or storage that can
be migrated, networking changes often require significant architectural modifications that
ripple through the entire system. This creates a scenario where getting the networking
foundation right from the start becomes critical to long­term operational success. Effec­
tive network architecture for Kubernetes on AWS requires establishing clear boundaries
between application tiers, implementing robust service discovery mechanisms, and de­
signing for multi­zone redundancy from the outset. The network must accommodate both
north­south and east­west traffic flows while maintaining security isolation and perfor­
mance optimization. By prioritizing these architectural principles early in the deployment
lifecycle, organizations can avoid costly reworking efforts and ensure their infrastructure
can adapt to changing operational requirements without major restructuring.
While networking forms the critical foundation, several other architectural considerations
demand equal strategic attention to ensure comprehensive operational success:
• Security and Access Control ­ continue to pose challenges in identity management,
secrets handling, and policy enforcement. Establishing proper RBAC configura­
tions, managing service account permissions, and securing container images de­
mand consistent governance.
• Observability and Monitoring – become increasingly complex as services multiply.
Implementing comprehensive logging, metrics collection, and distributed tracing
across multiple services demands coordinated tooling and standardized practices
to maintain clear visibility into system behavior.
• Configuration Management and Environment Consistency – across development,
staging, and production environments, can often result in configuration drift and
deployment inconsistencies. Preserving environment consistency while accommo­
dating environment­specific customizations requires structured methods for config­
uration templating and validation.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:21==
3
Infrastructure Architecture
In order to understand the necessity of the proposed architecture, it’s essential to first
look at how traditional cloud setups work today and their limitations. While modern cloud
systems do offer clear benefits compared to on­prem solutions, they also come with their
own set of issues, making it harder to scale, weakening systems resilience and tying
organizations into dependencies that restrict their ability to adapt and grow.
3.1
Traditional Cloud Architectures
Figure 3.1: Microservices Baseline Architecture on Microsoft Azure
Traditional cloud architectures typically follow a provider­specific approach where apps
are deployed using its native tools and services. As represented in the reference ar­
chitecture above, is possible to identify multiple layers of cloud­specific services: Azure
Kubernetes Service (AKS) for container orchestration, Azure Load Balancer for traffic dis­
tribution, Azure Container Registry for image storage, and various managed services such
as Azure Cosmos DB, Azure Cache for Redis, and Azure Service Bus for data persistence
and messaging.
The combination of cloud­native services with traditional IaC tools introduce some serious
limitations, increasing not only the effort on the development and deployment processes
but also on the maintenance of such applications. One big obstacle that emerges is
scalability. Since apps are often tightly coupled to specific cloud services, scaling them
means coordinating multiple cloud­specific resources with different characteristics and
limitations. Moreover, using traditional IaC tools for infrastructure provisioning adds an­
other layer of friction, as scaling decisions need to be implemented through separate
infrastructure code bases which usually aren’t flexible for fast and dynamic changes. Re­
siliency is also affected, especially when disaster recovery involves a multiple provider­
specific services, each with different backup and recovery strategies. IaC tools can further
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
13
==PAGE:22==
complicate things, adding complexity when trying to keep configurations consistent across
environments.
Vendor lock­in and operational complexity are two other major obstacles to evolving mod­
ern architectures. When systems are deeply coupled to cloud­specific APIs and services,
and rely on separate IaC setups using tools like Terraform or ARM templates, it creates
layers of dependency that go far beyond just the application itself. Teams end up relying
not only on particular cloud platforms, but also on the tooling used to manage infrastruc­
ture. This layered dependency introduces significant complexity, as teams have to drive a
mix of cloud services, IaC tools, and the way they all interact between them. It also makes
it difficult to replicate the full setup in local development, which leads to inconsistencies
between all the existing environments, resulting in more deployment risks and a slower
development process.
All the limitations highlighted, along with insights from previous research, point to the
need for more flexible, resilient and portable architectures, that can benefit from the cloud
and its offerings while keeping strategic independence and consistent operations across
different environments and providers.
3.2
Proposed Architecture Overview
As established during the problem analysis, successful Kubernetes application architec­
ture must encompass both the orchestration layer and the cloud infrastructure compo­
nents, in order to address the problems identified in previous sections. Therefore, this
section will be divided into two individual subsections: the orchestration layer architecture
and components, which presents a solution for the problems outlined in the problem anal­
ysis and traditional architecture overview, and the cloud infrastructure architecture, which
provides a solid foundation for the Kubernetes application while meeting the identified
requirements.
3.2.1
Orchestration Layer Architecture and Components
The proposed orchestration layer architecture, as visible on the figure below, brings to­
gether multiple components that work together to create a fluid experience, making it easy
to move from local development to cloud deployment.
14
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Kubernetes Driven Infrastructure Architecture (KDI)
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
15
==PAGE:24==
In order to achieve this architecture, the following components represent the core building
blocks that enable the solution:
• Local Kubernetes Clusters ­ lightweight Kubernetes clusters on developer worksta­
tions offer a complete development and testing environment that mirrors production,
offering quick feedback loops. These clusters are the main workspace for applica­
tion development and infrastructure validation, allowing developers to test the full
stack locally before committing to the GitOps workflow. Similar clusters are also
used for cloud deployments, leveraging the necessary resources to provision the
cloud components to replicate the application on.
• Git Repository ­ a centralized Git repository containing all infrastructure definitions,
application manifests and configuration files acts as the single source of truth for the
system’s state. Apart from the clear visibility of the system’s evolution via standard
Git workflows, it allows teams and organizations to manage their entire infrastructure
and application development lifecycle using a unified tool.
• ArgoCD ­ the GitOps operator responsible for monitoring the Git repository, ensur­
ing continuous synchronization between the desired state in Git and the actual state
of local and cloud environments. This architecture uses two distinct ArgoCD appli­
cations: one for application workloads and configurations, and another for infras­
tructure resources and their lifecycle. This separation allows independent scaling
of application and infrastructure management.
• Crossplane ­ the cloud­agnostic infrastructure provisioning engine that translates
XRDs into actual cloud resources, providing a standardized abstraction layer that
decouples infrastructure definitions from specific cloud provider implementations.
This component enables frictionless provider switching by allowing the same infras­
tructure definitions to target different cloud providers through configuration changes
in the resource definition files, eliminating the need for endless infrastructure code
rewrites when changing cloud providers while maintaining consistency in resource
management and deployment patterns.
3.2.2
Cloud Infrastructure Architecture
The figure below demonstrates the proposed cloud infrastructure architecture for this so­
lution.
16
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Cloud Infrastructure Architecture
This architecture is built using the following components:
• VPC ­ Acting as the foundation of this architecture, the Virtual Private Cloud (VPC)
provides an isolated network environment in AWS. It has an IGW attached, enabling
communications with external sources.
• Multi­AZ ­ The architecture leverages two Availability Zones (AZs), corresponding
to two physically separate data centers withing the same region, providing a robust
fault­tolerance mechanism. If one AZ experiences any type of issues, the applica­
tion can continue running on the other AZ. This architectural decision significantly
impacts aplications’ availability.
• Network Segmentation ­ Each AZ contains two types of subnets: a public subnet,
with direct route to the IGW, enabling access to resources from the internet. In
one AZ, there’s a NAT Gateway deployed in the public subnet, which serves as a
managed service for outbound internet connectivity; a private subnet, containing the
EKS Node Groups (Kubernetes worker nodes). Private subnets don’t have direct in­
ternet access, enhancing overall application security, as workloads can’t be directly
reached from the internet.
• Traffic Flow ­ Controlled by the route tables, with different configurations for the
two types of subnets: public route table directs traffic to the IGW for direct internet
access and private route tables direct outbound traffic to the NAT Gateway, allowing
private resources to reach the internet for updates, pulling container images, among
other operations, without being directly accessible from the internet.
• Kubernetes Layer ­ The EKS Node Groups in the private subnets run your con­
tainerized applications. These nodes can communicate with each other across AZs
and can pull container images or make API calls through the NAT Gateway, while
remaining protected from direct internet access. The proposed architecture has
two different types of Node groups: on­demand instances, which provide guaran­
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
17
==PAGE:26==
teed availability and consistent performance; and spot instances, which offer cost­
effective compute resources with potential interruption trade­offs. Configuring the
cluster to prioritize workflows to run on spot instances reduces costs from 60% to
80%, offering an impactful cost reduction mechanism.
3.3
Component Justification and Selection
3.3.1
ArgoCD: The GitOps Engine
ArgoCD was selected as the heart of this GitOps implementation due to its strong declar­
ative configuration management and continuous reconciliation. It thrives at maintaining
the desired state by automatically correcting drifts between declared configurations and
actual deployments, ensuring consistency across environments. ArgoCD’s application­
of­applications pattern simplifies advanced environment management, allowing identical
infrastructure definitions to be deployed with environment­specific overlays. Its robust
rollback features enable quick recovery from failed deployments by reverting to previous
stable states. ArgoCD excels in production infrastructure management due to its strong
integration with Kubernetes­native tools and robust monitoring, alerting, and visualization
features.
However, there are limitations to consider. ArgoCD can be resource­heavy in large de­
ployments, and its web UI may slow down when handling numerous applications. Teams
new to GitOps might find its learning curve challenging. Furthermore, its reliance on Git
means that any Git repository downtime will affect deployment capabilities. It is also im­
portant to define specific protection rules for repositories, avoiding possible failures in a
team’s flow, leading to undesired infrastructure states.
While alternative GitOps tools like Flux CD (offering a lightweight agent and native Helm/Kus­
tomize support) and Tekton Pipelines (providing flexible CI/CD workflows at the cost of
more configuration) exist, ArgoCD was selected based on its mature ecosystem, compre­
hensive application lifecycle management, and strong multi­tenancy features, which align
with the system’s scalability and resilience needs.
3.3.2
Crossplane: Cloud­Agnostic Infrastructure Provisioning
Crossplane offers a significant change in cloud infrastructure management, making it suit­
able for this architecture. It improves cloud independence using Compositions, which
build on top of Kubernetes APIs, unlike traditional IaC tools.
This allows for consis­
tent resource definitions across different cloud providers and a Kubernetes­native ex­
perience, enabling infrastructure management with existing tools and skills. Crossplane’s
XRDs simplify cloud­provider complexities by defining only essential configurations. It
also provides comprehensive lifecycle management, including provisioning, updates, and
cleanup, with built­in dependency management and error handling.
Despite its advantages, Crossplane has some challenges. Its layered abstraction can
add complexity, making it harder to debug infrastructure issues. Performance might be
an issue in large deployments due to the overhead from controllers for each resource
type. Teams moving from traditional IaC tools like Terraform or CloudFormation may face
18
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:27==
a steep learning curve. Also, being a newer ecosystem, Crossplane has fewer community
resources and third­party integrations compared to more established tools.
While alternatives like Terraform (mature ecosystem, extensive provider support), Pulumi
(multi­language, imperative model), and cloud­native solutions (AWS CDK, Azure Re­
source Manager) offer reliability and documentation, Crossplane was chosen due to its
Kubernetes­native approach. This fits perfectly in the container­first philosophy and its
declarative model integrates with GitOps, with abstraction capabilities that enable cloud­
agnostic deployments without sacrificing power for complex infrastructure.
3.4
Workflow and Operational Model
3.4.1
Development and Deployment
This architecture uses a dual­cluster system to offer consistent development experiences
while keeping local and cloud environments separate. Automated tools, specifically Task­
file, manage the deployment workflow by providing preset tasks that automate the de­
ployment and configuration of both cluster types without needing manual intervention.
The two clusters that enable this workflow are:
• A local development cluster which is the main workspace for developers to quickly
iterate on application code and infrastructure definitions. It mirrors the cloud envi­
ronment’s structure but is adapted for local use, removing external dependencies
and cloud costs. This cluster can be managed on­demand (created, deleted and
updated) without impacting deployed resources, giving developers autonomy and
fast feedback for testing changes.
• A cloud deployment cluster, responsible for creating and replicating the application
on the chosen cloud provider. This process begins with Crossplane provisioning
the necessary cloud infrastructure, including the Kubernetes cluster and other ap­
plication resources. Once the infrastructure is established, ArgoCD is automatically
installed in the provisioned cluster, enabling the system to become self­managed.
The primary difference between the local and cloud environments is in their resource
overlays and provider configurations: the local cluster uses local substitutes for services
like databases and storage, whereas the cloud cluster utilizes managed cloud services
provisioned by Crossplane. A key benefit of this method is its resilience to local infras­
tructure issues. After the cloud cluster becomes self­managed via ArgoCD, it functions
independently of the local development setup. If the local cluster or development machine
goes offline or the cluster gets deleted, the cloud resources continue to run and stay syn­
chronized with the Git repository. This autonomy allows developers to connect to existing
cloud resources from new local environments without interrupting production workloads.
3.4.2
Continuous Integration
The continuous integration model uses GitOps principles to ensure consistency between
the desired state in the Git repository and the actual state of local and cloud environ­
ments. ArgoCD instances in production environments constantly monitor the shared Git
repository, identifying changes to application manifests and infrastructure definitions in
real­time.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
19
==PAGE:28==
When changes are committed, ArgoCD applications independently assess and apply
the necessary updates to their environments. This parallel synchronization keeps local
development environments aligned with cloud deployments, while environment­specific
overlays ensure correct configurations for each target. The local cluster quickly reflects
changes for rapid iterations, and the cloud cluster applies the same logical changes using
its production­configured resources. The self­managed cloud cluster is especially useful
in this continuous integration setup. Once ArgoCD is active in the cloud, it independently
monitors the Git repository and applies updates, regardless of the local development in­
frastructure’s status. This results in a resilient, distributed GitOps system where the cloud
environment can adapt to repository changes even if local development resources are
unavailable or being reconfigured.
3.5
Key Advantages and Challenges
3.5.1
Advantages
• Scalability and resiliency ­ the architecture inherently supports scalability due to its
cloud­agnostic design and Kubernetes­native basis. Applications can scale hori­
zontally using cloud resources set up by Crossplane, and the GitOps model en­
sures scaling configurations are version­controlled and applied consistently. The
dual­cluster strategy improves resilience by offering multiple deployment targets and
minimizing single points of failure. The self­managed aspect of cloud clusters guar­
antees continuous operation even if local development infrastructure is down. Addi­
tionally, ArgoCD’s automatic reconciliation features offer self­healing infrastructure
capable of recovering from configuration drift or transient issues.
• Portability ­ Crossplane’s abstraction layer offers true cloud portability by separating
infrastructure definitions from provider­specific details. Organizations can switch
cloud providers or use multi­cloud approaches without redoing infrastructure code,
needing only to adjust provider settings and resource definitions. This portability
covers not just basic resource migration but also complex network, storage, and
compute setups. This provides strategic flexibility, lessens vendor lock­in risks, and
keeps operational methods consistent across various cloud environments.
• Unified development environments ­ the architecture removes environment incon­
sistencies by employing the same tools, workflows, and infrastructure definitions
for both local development and cloud production. Developers use identical ArgoCD
interfaces, Kubernetes APIs, and Crossplane resources across all environments,
minimizing context switching and learning curves. This consistency also applies to
troubleshooting and debugging, allowing skills from local development to be directly
used in production, speeding up problem­solving and simplifying operations.
• Cost optimization and resource efficiency ­ local development cuts cloud expenses
by removing the need for continuous cloud­based development environments. Teams
can allocate cloud resources only when necessary for integration testing or produc­
tion deployment, while still having full local development capabilities. The GitOps
model further minimizes resource waste through automated cleanup and consistent
resource management.
20
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:29==
3.5.2
Challenges
• Local infrastructure complexity and maintenance ­ managing separate Kubernetes
configurations adds some complexity for development teams, demanding some
skills in cluster administration, networking, and storage setup. Teams need to main­
tain local infrastructure components that replicates cloud features like database,
which can have some impact in the stability of such environments. The continuous
task of syncing local environments with changing cloud setups creates a mainte­
nance burden that can reduce developer productivity if not handled effectively.
• State management ­ when local clusters are removed or rebuilt, reconnecting to
existing cloud resources can be tricky and prone to errors. Although the cloud clus­
ter manages itself, developers need to carefully set up local environments again if
needed, to point to existing cloud resources without creating conflicts or accidental
changes. This requires a thorough understanding of how resources are connected
and might need manual steps to ensure local and cloud environments are correctly
aligned.
• Learning curve and skill requirements ­ the architecture requires knowledge of sev­
eral complex technologies, such as Kubernetes, GitOps, Crossplane, and cloud
provider APIs. Teams moving from traditional development methods face a steep
learning curve to understand declarative infrastructure management, GitOps work­
flows, and the details of matching local and cloud environments. This complexity
can slow down initial adoption and necessitates considerable investment in training
and skill development.
• Network and connectivity dependencies ­ the architecture’s dependence on Git repos­
itory access can lead to failures if network problems stop ArgoCD from reaching
the repository. Local development setups might struggle to mimic cloud network
configurations, and creating secure connections between local clusters and cloud
resources can complicate network setup and security management.
3.6
Implementation Considerations
Organizations looking to use this architecture should carefully consider several important
implementation factors for successful setup and use:
• Infrastructure requirements and resource planning ­ need to cover both local de­
velopment and cloud provider choices. Development machines must have enough
CPU, memory, and storage to run local Kubernetes clusters well. Organizations
should check how well cloud providers work with Crossplane, looking at API stability,
service availability, and pricing. Set clear rules for resource use in both development
and production to avoid high costs and performance problems.
• Repository structure and governance ­ key aspect to effective GitOps adoption. De­
sign Git repositories to separate application manifests from infrastructure definitions,
allowing for independent versioning and deployment. Implement branch protection,
code reviews, and automated validation to ensure configuration quality. Define clear
ownership for components and environments to ensure accountability and enable
collaboration.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
21
==PAGE:30==
• Monitoring and observability strategy ­ should cover both infrastructure and appli­
cation layers in all environments. Implement thorough monitoring for ArgoCD syn­
chronization, Crossplane resource provisioning, and application health. Set alert
thresholds that consider the distributed nature of the architecture, so operations
teams can quickly find and fix issues in local or cloud environments.
• Disaster recovery and business continuity planning ­ must consider the specific fea­
tures of this architecture. Create procedures for recovering from Git repository prob­
lems, ArgoCD failures, and cloud provider outages. Test backup and restore meth­
ods for both local development setups and cloud resources, so teams can quickly
recover from different failures. Document how to reconnect local clusters to existing
cloud resources to reduce downtime during recovery.
• Security and compliance integration ­ encompasses careful thought about secrets
management, access controls, and audit needs, among others. Use strong secrets
management solutions that work the same way in local and cloud environments, and
don’t put credentials directly in Git repositories. Set up role­based access controls
for ArgoCD and cloud resources, following the principle of least privilege. Think
about compliance rules early on, because adding security controls later can be hard
in GitOps setups.
22
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:31==
4
Implementation
The following chapter will look at how these components come together to create a work­
ing, distributed cloud system built on local Kubernetes clusters. As previously discussed,
realizing this kind of implementation requires leveraging two key technologies, Crossplane
and ArgoCD. Along with them, a set of complementing tools are used to give additional
capabilities and complete the entire architecture. Before diving into the practical imple­
mentation of the proposed architecture, it is important to understand the building blocks
of such technologies. Analyzing these components individually will allow us to better un­
derstand how their qualities complement each other and collectively enable application
deployment and management in a distributed environment.
4.1
Primary Building Blocks
At the heart of the suggested solution is Kubernetes, which serves as the foundation for
the entire implementation. Before diving into the specifics of how the solution is put up,
it is important to first understand Kubernetes and its essential concepts, how it organizes
workloads, and the main components that allow it to run applications consistently and
efficiently. Based on the official documentation [4], the first concepts to understand with
regard to Kubernetes are:
• Pod ­ Smallest deployable unit in Kubernetes. A pod is a group of one or more con­
tainers, which can share resources and be configured to work together in services.
• Node ­ A node is a computer/server, responsible for hosting pods. Multiple nodes
are joined together to form a cluster. A cluster can also contain a single node.
• Control Plane ­ A subset of nodes in the cluster dedicated to performing system
tasks. Nodes that are part of the control plane are referred to as control plane
nodes.
• Data Plane ­ A subset of nodes in the cluster dedicated to running user workloads.
Nodes that are part of the data plane are referred to as worker Nodes.
The following diagram shows the core components of the Kubernetes architecture and
how they interact with one another:
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Kubernetes Architecture Reference
Kubernetes is comprised of many smaller components:
• etcd ­ Key­value store used for storing all cluster data. It serves as the source of
truth for the cluster state and configuration.
• kube­api­server ­ The front end for the Kubernetes control plane.
• kube­scheduler ­ Schedules pods onto the appropriate nodes based on resource
availability and other constraints.
• kube­controller­manager ­ Runs controller processes. Each controller is a sepa­
rate process that manages routine tasks such as maintaining the desired state of
resources, managing replication, handling node operations, etc...
• cloud­controller­manager ­ Integrates with the underlying cloud provider (if running
in one) to manage cloud­specific resources. It handles tasks such as managing load
balancers, storage, and networking.
• kubelet ­ An agent that runs on each worker node and ensures that containers are
running in pods and manages the lifecycle of containers.
• kube­proxy ­ This network proxy runs on each node and maintains network rules to
allow communication to and from pods.
As mentioned in previous chapters, one of the key challenges in building a distributed
cloud system is achieving cloud independence while maintaining a consistent and man­
ageable approach to infrastructure. Crossplane directly addresses this challenge by ex­
tending Kubernetes with powerful abstractions for infrastructure management. Its capabil­
ities can be better understood by looking at its main components, which together allow for
24
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:33==
a Kubernetes­native approach to provisioning and managing cloud resources. According
to Crossplane’s documentation [13], these are it’s four major components:
• Composition ­ Compositions in Crossplane serve as templates that define how mul­
tiple Kubernetes resources should be combined into a single higher­level abstrac­
tion, known as a Composite Resource. Instead of creating managed resources
directly, a Composition specifies the blueprint for how those resources are provi­
sioned and related to each other. For example, a Composition might describe a
complete environment consisting of a virtual machine, storage resources, and net­
working policies, all linked together into a reusable solution. Composite Resource
themselves are created from these templates. While the Composition defines how
resources should be assembled, the Composite Resource represents a concrete
instance that provisions the actual managed resources according to that definition.
Many different Composite Resources can share the same Composition, allowing
teams to standardize infrastructure patterns while tailoring individual instances as
needed. Underlying this mechanism are Composite Resource Definition, which ex­
tend Kubernetes with new custom APIs. These APIs enable to request infrastructure
in a Kubernetes­native way, using either fine­grained parameters such as storage
space in gigabytes or higher­level abstractions like deployment size options place­
ment choices. Crossplane doesn’t limit the API definitions.
• Managed Resource ­ MRs are ready­made Kubernetes custom resources. Each
MR extends Kubernetes with the ability to manage a new system. An example
of this would be an Relational Database Service (RDS) instance MR that extends
Kubernetes with the ability to manage AWS RDS instances. Crossplane has an
extensive library of managed resources you can use to manage almost any cloud
provider, or cloud native software.
• Operations ­ Operations enable running operational tasks using function pipelines.
While composition and managed resources focus on creating and managing infras­
tructure, operations handle tasks that don’t fit the typical resource creation pattern,
like certificate monitoring, rolling upgrades, or scheduled maintenance. Operations
run function pipelines to completion like a Kubernetes Job. Instead of continuously
managing resources, they perform specific tasks and report the results. An exam­
ple of an operation would be the possibility of the Kubernetes control plane to watch
SSL certificates on Ingress resources. Creating an operation for such task would
enable the control plane to check the certificate and annotate the Ingress with expiry
information.
• Package manager ­ The Crossplane package manager lets you install new managed
resources and composition functions. It is also possible to package any part of a
control plane’s configuration and install it using the package manager. This allows
to deploy multiple control planes with identical capabilities ­ for example one control
plane per region or per service.
The proposed solution makes use of both Compositions and Composite Resource, allow­
ing for reuse templates while provisioning specific infrastructure instances. The diagram
below shows how Crossplane orchestrates these two types of resources to enable a con­
sistent and scalable deployment.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Crossplane Architecture Reference
In addition to Crossplane, the architecture relies on ArgoCD to implement GitOps prac­
tices and ensure consistent, automated delivery of applications and infrastructure. Ar­
goCD strengthens the system by continuously reconciling declared configurations with the
live cluster state, thereby reducing configuration drift and maintaining reliability across en­
vironments. It provides a Kubernetes­native solution that combines declarative manage­
ment with powerful operational features such as rollbacks, environment­specific overlays,
and monitoring integrations. To better understand how ArgoCD achieves this, it is useful
to examine its main components, each of which plays a distinct role in enabling GitOps
workflows. According to the official documentation [14], these are it’s main components:
• API Server ­ gRPC/REST server which exposes the API consumed by the Web UI,
CLI, and CI/CD systems. It has set of responsibilities, such as application manage­
ment and status reporting, invoking of application operations (sync, rollback, user­
defined actions), repository and cluster credential management, authentication and
auth delegation to external identity providers, RBAC enforcement and listener/for­
warder for Git webhook events.
• Repository Server ­ Internal service which maintains a local cache of the Git reposi­
tory holding the application manifests. It is responsible for generating and returning
the Kubernetes manifests when provided certain inputs like repository URL, revision
(commit, tag, branch), application path or template specific settings.
• Application Controller ­ Kubernetes controller which continuously monitors running
applications and compares the current, live state against the desired target state,
as specified in the repository. It detects OutOfSync application state and optionally
takes corrective action. It is responsible for invoking any user­defined hooks for
lifecycle events (PreSync, Sync, PostSync).
The diagram below demonstrates how ArgoCD manages applications using continuous
reconciliation, ensuring that declared configurations and live cluster states are consistent
across environments:
26
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: ArgoCD Architecture Reference
4.2
Supporting Tools and Services
In addition to Crossplane and ArgoCD, several other tools contributed to the implemen­
tation of the architecture, each focusing on specific aspects of its operation:
• Devbox ­ Command­line tool for creating isolated shells for development. The re­
quired project packages are defined in a configuration file, and Devbox automatically
provisions an isolated, reproducible environment with those packages installed. De­
vbox works similar to a package manager like yarn – except the packages it man­
ages are at the operating­system level [15]. The proposed solution works on a
Devbox environment, with dependencies like kubectl, the CLI to interact with Ku­
bernetes or Kind being available inside the development environment only.
• Helm ­ Package manager for Kubernetes. Helm uses a packaging format called
charts. A chart is a collection of files that describe a related set of Kubernetes re­
sources. All installed charts on a Kubernetes cluster get managed through releases,
allowing to install a single chart multiple times with different releases in a cluster.
A single chart might be used to deploy something simple, like a caching database
pod, or something complex, like a full web app stack with HTTP servers, databases,
caches, and so on [16]. The proposed solution uses Helm to install a single chart,
Crossplane, according to the recommended installation instructions, enabling this
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
27
==PAGE:36==
component on the Kubernetes cluster.
• Kind ­ Tool for running local Kubernetes clusters using Docker, where each Node is a
container. kind is divided into Go packages implementing most of the functionality: a
command line for users and a Node base image. Inside this node, core Kubernetes
components run as pods. Networking is provided by a CNI plugin and CoreDNS
handles service discovery. Finally, user applications run as regular Kubernetes pods
in the same node [17]. The proposed solution uses kind as the main Kubernetes
engine to deploy all the clusters involved on the application lifecycle.
• Kustomize ­ Kustomize is a tool for customizing Kubernetes configurations that intro­
duces a template­free way to modify application configurations simplifying the use
of off­the­shelf applications [18]. The proposed solution uses Kustomize templates
to install some components such as nginx or creating multiple configurations such
as databases with claims, allowing for a native Kubernetes setup, eliminating some
operational complexity.
• Nginx ­ Nginx is a high­performance web server and reverse proxy that efficiently
handles multiple concurrent connections with low resource usage. It’s widely used
for serving web content, load balancing, and proxying requests to backend appli­
cations, making it a popular choice for modern web infrastructure and cloud de­
ployments. The proposed solutions uses Nginx as an ingress to manage external
traffic routing into the Kubernetes cluster and distribute requests to the appropriate
services based on defined rules and configurations.
• Task ­ Lightweight task runner/build tool, inspired by Make, that aims for simplicity
and ease of use. Similarly to Make, Task uses a Taskfile, written in YAML, to define
the tasks that can be run [19]. The proposed solution uses a Taskfile to automate the
deployment of infrastructure and application, on both local and cloud environments.
4.3
Example Application
In order to demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed solution, a simple example ap­
plication was created as a proof­of­concept, validating the deployment process of the
defined infrastructure to the cloud environment. The application in question is a simple
Go API containing two endpoints, one health check and one endpoint communicating with
an external mock API. The application also interacts with a caching database, a Valkey
instance in this case, in order to cache the answers from the external API, during a short
period of time. This setup, although simplistic, enables the replication of an environment
with several interacting components, providing a more realistic demonstration of the archi­
tecture’s capabilities. The diagram below describes the application’s minimal architecture.
The following code snippet presents the functionality of the API.
1
func (h *ApiHandler) GetTodo(w http.ResponseWriter , r *http.Request) {
2
ctx := r.Context()
3
id := chi.URLParam(r, "id")
4
cacheKey := fmt.Sprintf("todo:%s", id)
5
6
// check cache
7
if cachedData , err := h.svc.GetCache(ctx, cacheKey); err == nil {
8
h.writeJSONResponse(w, http.StatusOK , "HIT", cachedData)
9
log.Printf("%s: cache hit", cacheKey)
10
return
28
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:37==
11
} else {
12
log.Printf("%s: cache miss or error: %v", cacheKey , err)
13
}
14
15
// fetch from external API
16
url := fmt.Sprintf("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/%s", id)
17
resp, err := http.Get(url)
18
if err != nil {
19
log.Printf("Error fetching API: %v", err)
20
http.Error(w, "Error fetching API", http.StatusNotFound)
21
return
22
}
23
defer resp.Body.Close()
24
25
body, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body)
26
if err != nil {
27
log.Printf("Error reading response body: %v", err)
28
http.Error(w, "Error reading response body", http.
StatusInternalServerError)
29
return
30
}
31
32
// cache the response
33
if err := h.svc.SetCache(ctx, cacheKey , body); err != nil {
34
log.Printf("Error caching response: %v", err)
35
} else {
36
log.Printf("%s: added to cache", cacheKey)
37
}
38
39
// write response
40
h.writeJSONResponse(w, http.StatusOK , "MISS", body)
41
}
Listing 4.1: External API Handler Implementation
As shown in the listing above, the application first checks for a task, cached by it’s ID, on
the cache database. If so, it returns the task as a response to the client. If not, it requests
it from the external API and stores it before sending the response back. All requests sent
back to the client are created with a helper function named writeJSONResponse, which
sends the response back with an HTTP status code and a X-Cache header informing
whether the request was served from cache or not.
This application also has an associated pipeline which, under a specific set of rules, such
as the push of release tags into the main branch, tests, builds and publishes the applica­
tion into the Docker registry as a public image, simulating the entire application develop­
ment lifecycle on modern software teams.
4.4
Execution of the Proposed Architecture
With the architecture and principal components defined, this section will present the practi­
cal implementation of the proposed solution. This implementation assumes a pre­configured
Devbox environment containing all the required dependencies necessary for orchestrating
the local Kubernetes clusters as well as they’re integrated tools, providing a consistent
and reproducible development environment for the proposed solution. This solution is
divided into two phases: first, a local deployment phase, which focuses on configuring
the local clusters and deploying the application with its necessary components; second,
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
29
==PAGE:38==
a cloud deployment phase, which focuses on configuring Crossplane and creating the
required XRs to provision the cloud infrastructure for application deployment.
Each installed component will have its own namespace, ensuring a clear separation of
concerns between components. Additionally, as mentioned early, the entire deployment
process will be automated using Task, with the corresponding Taskfile sections for each
phase analyzed at the end of each respective section.
4.4.1
Local Deployment Phase
The first phase starts with the setup of the local Kubernetes clusters which, as previously
mentioned, will run using kind. For this solution, kind requires a particular cluster con­
figuration to allow the local host to make requests to the Nginx ingress controller over
ports 80/443 (enabling external traffic to reach the application through the ingress) [17].
Therefore, in order to apply this configuration, it is necessary to create the clusters with
the settings defined on the listing below.
1
kind: Cluster
2
apiVersion: kind.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
3
nodes:
4
- role: control -plane
5
extraPortMappings:
6
- containerPort: 80
7
hostPort: 80
8
protocol: TCP
9
- containerPort: 443
10
hostPort: 443
11
protocol: TCP
Listing 4.2: Kind Cluster Configuration
Having concluded the creation of the local deployment cluster, it is possible to start in­
stalling each component. Starting with ArgoCD, this component is one of many resources
installed using a Kustomize template. Although the entire deployment process is fully
automated with a Taskfile, Kustomize templates are used for installing Kubernetes com­
ponents, providing a consistent way to maintain resources and associated configurations
while reducing complexity and keeping the automation file clean. The Kustomize template
for installing ArgoCD, like many others in this project, has the following structure.
1
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
2
kind: Kustomization
3
namespace: argocd
4
resources:
5
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/argoproj/argo-cd/stable/manifests/
install.yaml
Listing 4.3: Kustomize Template for ArgoCD Installation
After installing ArgoCD and ensuring that all its components are available, it is possible
to proceed with the installation of the Argo applications. Again, to maintain a clear sepa­
ration of concerns, two ArgoCD applications will be used in this solution, one responsible
for the application itself, another responsible for the cloud infrastructure. In this phase,
the cloud application will not be created, as there is no cloud setup present on this deploy­
ment. The listing below demonstrates the ArgoCD configuration used for the application
30
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:39==
deployment.
1
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
2
kind: Application
3
metadata:
4
name: argocd -epicshelter -app
5
namespace: argocd
6
spec:
7
project: default
8
source:
9
repoURL: https://github.com/borisdvlpr/epicshelter
10
targetRevision: HEAD
11
path: manifests/epicshelter
12
destination:
13
server: https://kubernetes.default.svc
14
namespace: epicshelter
15
syncPolicy:
16
syncOptions:
17
- CreateNamespace=true
18
automated:
19
selfHeal: true
20
prune: true
Listing 4.4: ArgoCD Application Configuration
The configuration above contains several key aspects:
• Source specification ­ specifies the Git repository by it’s URL, as well as the desti­
nation path for the desired Kubernetes manifests.
• Destination specification ­ specifies the target cluster and namespace for deploy­
ment. In this case, it points to the local cluster address and to the ‘epicshelter‘
namespace.
• Sync options ­ enables automated synchronization with self­healing and pruning
capabilities (the ability to delete resources that are no longer defined on the source
manifests).
With the configuration of the ArgoCD application in place, the following step will be the
configuration of the network and data resources. Similarly to ArgoCD, Nginx will also
be installed with a Kustomize template following the same structure, with only the URL
changing. After ensuring the availability of all Nginx components in the cluster, the ingress
configuration is applied. The Nginx ingress configuration for the cluster follows a mini­
mal setup, containing only the essential configuration required for the application to run
smoothly. The listing below presents this configuration, followed by an overview of its key
components.
1
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
2
kind: Ingress
3
metadata:
4
name: ingress -nginx
5
namespace: epicshelter
6
annotations:
7
nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite -target: /
8
spec:
9
ingressClassName: nginx
10
rules:
11
- http:
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
31
==PAGE:40==
12
paths:
13
- path: /
14
pathType: Prefix
15
backend:
16
service:
17
name: epicshelter
18
port:
19
number: 3000
Listing 4.5: Nginx Ingress Configuration
• Rewrite annotation ­ The nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: / an­
notation ensures that all incoming requests are rewritten to the root path before
being forwarded to the backend service.
• Routing rule ­ A single HTTP rule captures all traffic coming to the root path / with
a prefix match, meaning any request starting with / will be routed to the backend.
• Backend service ­ All matched traffic is directed to the epicshelter service on port
3000, where the application is listening.
This application only needs a single data resource which, in this case, corresponds to a
Valkey instance. Although it’s installation is also done with a Kustomize template, in con­
trast to the previously installed resources, there is not a Valkey manifest available for the
cluster, with the deployment requiring traditionally defined Kubernetes manifests. Prior to
the standard deployment, Valkey will also have a PVC associated with it, ensuring data
persistence in case of failure by the caching database. The following listings present both
the claim and the manifest used for deploying Valkey.
1
apiVersion: v1
2
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
3
metadata:
4
name: valkey-data
5
namespace: epicshelter
6
spec:
7
accessModes:
8
- ReadWriteOnce
9
resources:
10
requests:
11
storage: 1Gi
12
storageClassName: standard
Listing 4.6: Valkey PVC
1
apiVersion: apps/v1
2
kind: Deployment
3
metadata:
4
name: valkey
5
namespace: epicshelter
6
labels:
7
app: valkey
8
spec:
9
replicas: 1
10
selector:
11
matchLabels:
12
app: valkey
13
template:
14
metadata:
15
labels:
32
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:41==
16
app: valkey
17
spec:
18
containers:
19
- name: valkey
20
image: valkey/valkey:8.1.1-alpine
21
ports:
22
- containerPort: 6379
23
resources:
24
limits:
25
memory: "512Mi"
26
cpu: "1000m"
27
requests:
28
memory: "256Mi"
29
cpu: "500m"
30
args: ["valkey -server", "--save", "900", "1", "--dir", "/data"]
31
volumeMounts:
32
- name: valkey-data
33
mountPath: /data
34
volumes:
35
- name: valkey-data
36
persistentVolumeClaim:
37
claimName: valkey-data
38
---
39
apiVersion: v1
40
kind: Service
41
metadata:
42
name: valkey
43
labels:
44
app: valkey
45
spec:
46
selector:
47
app: valkey
48
ports:
49
- port: 6379
50
targetPort: 6379
51
type: ClusterIP
Listing 4.7: Valkey Deployment Manifest
Finally, with all the necessary components deployed and configured, the application meets
the requirements to be deployed. As mentioned in the previous section, there is a pipeline
that tests, builds and publishes the application into the Docker Hub as a public image, with
the name b0risdvlpr/epicshelter. Therefore, for the application manifest, the image
will be pulled and some simple configurations will be specified, such as memory and CPU
usage limits, the port where the application is going to be accessible from and the URL
for the Valkey database. Such configurations can be seen on the listing below.
1
apiVersion: apps/v1
2
kind: Deployment
3
metadata:
4
name: epicshelter
5
spec:
6
replicas: 2
7
selector:
8
matchLabels:
9
app: epicshelter
10
template:
11
metadata:
12
labels:
13
app: epicshelter
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
33
==PAGE:42==
14
spec:
15
containers:
16
- name: epicshelter
17
image: b0risdvlpr/epicshelter
18
resources:
19
limits:
20
memory: "256Mi"
21
cpu: "250m"
22
ports:
23
- containerPort: 3000
24
env:
25
- name: CACHE_URL
26
value: "valkey:6379"
27
---
28
apiVersion: v1
29
kind: Service
30
metadata:
31
name: epicshelter
32
spec:
33
type: ClusterIP
34
selector:
35
app: epicshelter
36
ports:
37
- port: 3000
38
targetPort: 3000
Listing 4.8: Application Deployment Manifest
With the local application deployment finalized, it is now possible to test if the application
is working and both the application and database are establishing communication. As
mentioned on the Example Application section, when sending the response back to the
client, the API will send the request with a header informing if the request was served
from cache or not. It is possible to easily do this verification by calling the API on a web
browser, and check the information on the header. Naturally, calling the API on a specific
ID for the first time will result on a cache miss, as it is possible to observe on the image
below.
34
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: Application Request Cache Miss
However, calling the API on the same ID for the second time will result in a cache hit as
expected, confirming that both components are communicating as desired. The described
behavior can be observed on the following image.
Figure 4.5: Application Request Cache Hit
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
35
==PAGE:44==
The listing below presents the corresponding part of the Taskfile for this phase.
1
version: "3"
2
3
silent: false
4
5
vars:
6
ENV: local
7
TIMEOUT_SEC: 90s
8
9
APP_NS: epicshelter
10
ARGO_NS: argocd
11
CROSSPLANE_NS: crossplane -system
12
INGRESS_NS: nginx-ingress
13
14
tasks:
15
setup-cluster:
16
desc: Create a Kind cluster for {{.ENV}}
17
cmds:
18
- kind create cluster --name epicshelter -{{.ENV}} --config infra/kind/
cluster -config.yaml || true
19
20
setup-argo:
21
desc: Install ArgoCD and configure application
22
cmds:
23
- echo "----- Setting up ArgoCD -----"
24
- kubectl create namespace {{.ARGO_NS}} || true
25
- kubectl apply -k infra/argocd
26
- argocd login --core
27
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace {{.ARGO_NS}}
28
- kubectl wait --for=condition=Available deployment --all --timeout=90s
29
- kubectl apply -f argocd/argo-infra-app.yaml -f argocd/argo-epicshelter
-app.yaml
30
31
setup-network:
32
desc: Configure networking components
33
cmds:
34
- echo "----- Setting up network infrastructure -----"
35
- kubectl create namespace {{.INGRESS_NS}} || true
36
- kubectl apply -k infra/network
37
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace {{.INGRESS_NS}}
38
- kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod --selector=app.kubernetes.io/
component=controller --timeout=90s
39
- kubectl apply -f infra/network/ingress/ingress -nginx.yaml
40
41
deploy-data:
42
desc: Deploy data infrastructure services
43
cmds:
44
- echo "----- Deploying data infrastructure -----"
45
- kubectl create namespace {{.APP_NS}} || true
46
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace {{.APP_NS}}
47
- kubectl apply -k infra/storage
48
- kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod --selector=app=valkey --timeout
=90s
49
50
deploy-app:
51
desc: Deploy epicshelter application services
52
cmds:
53
- echo "----- Deploying app on local cluster -----"
54
- kubectl create namespace {{.APP_NS}} || true
55
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace={{.APP_NS}}
36
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:45==
56
- kubectl apply -f manifests/epicshelter/epicshelter.yaml
57
58
deploy:local:
59
desc: Complete local environment setup and deployment
60
cmds:
61
- task: setup-cluster
62
- task: setup-argo
63
- task: setup-network
64
- task: deploy-data
65
- task: deploy-app
Listing 4.9: Application Deployment Manifest
Taskfile allows to define multiple distinct tasks, which can be called by another task. This
way, it enables to reutilize tasks in different deployments, only calling the required infras­
tructure configuration for the desired deployment phase. Each task is properly identified
and described, to enable a better visibility not only when maintaining the automation pro­
cess, but during the deployment execution. Most tasks also contain specific rules, de­
pending on the enabled components, ensuring that they are fully deployed and available
before moving into the next step. If the execution of a task fails during deployment, the
entire process is stopped.
4.4.2
Cloud Deployment Phase
Before moving forward with the Crossplane setup, it is important to clarify a few key points.
Infrastructure as Code tools, regardless of their association with cloud providers, are tools
that abstract API requests when creating resources, making it easier to build, change, and
version infrastructure safely and efficiently. Cloud agnostic tools like Crossplane achieve
greater flexibility in managing infrastructure across multiple cloud platforms through the
usage of providers. Providers are pre­defined API clients, making it easier for developers
to interact and deploy applications across multiple providers without having to manage
multiple clients or needing to learn the specifics of each provider’s API. However, there
are some differences on how Crossplane manages resources opposed to other IaC tools
like Terraform.
Tools like Terraform operate as CLI­driven tools where users write configuration files and
execute commands to provision infrastructure.
This approach presents challenges in
larger organizations due to state file conflicts during collaboration, monolithic configu­
rations that require managing entire systems for small changes, and lack of continuous
monitoring that allows infrastructure drift to go undetected. In contrast, Crossplane func­
tions as a Kubernetes­style control plane that runs continuously, monitoring resources
and automatically maintaining alignment between actual infrastructure and declared con­
figurations through continuous reconciliation. Unlike Terraform’s monolithic approach,
Crossplane represents each resource as an independent API object, enabling granular
management and allowing platform teams to create higher­level XRs that abstract com­
plexity while maintaining guardrails and access control. This Kubernetes­native approach
integrates seamlessly with GitOps workflows and familiar tools like kubectl, automatically
correcting any drift from the desired state without manual intervention. The diagram below
represents how Crossplane interacts with cloud providers.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: Crossplane Workflow Diagram
The first step on the Crossplane setup is to initialize the required providers, as described
on the listing below.
1
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: Provider
3
metadata:
4
name: provider -aws-ec2
5
spec:
6
package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider -aws-ec2:v1.23.2
Listing 4.10: Application Deployment Manifest
The listing only presents one of three providers initialized.
This provider will enable
the creation of network resources on AWS, such as VPCs or an Internet Gateways,
which will be covered in listings below. However, this setup requires two extra providers:
the provider-aws-eks provider, which enables the creation of managed Kubernetes re­
sources and associated components; and the provider-aws-iam, which enables the cre­
ation of roles and policies for the defined resources. These providers will also need a
provider configuration, which will pass the necessary credentials for creating the defined
resources. There is one additional Crossplane configuration required before defining the
Compositions. In order for Crossplane to translate XRD parameters into XR definitions
when creating or updating resources, it is necessary to install a function, which will work
similarly to a configuration language plugin. The listing below demonstrates the configu­
ration of the function responsible for this translation, named patch-and-transform.
1
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: Function
3
metadata:
4
name: function -patch-and-transform
5
spec:
6
package: xpkg.crossplane.io/crossplane -contrib/function -patch-and-transform:
v0.8.2
38
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:47==
Listing 4.11: Application Deployment Manifest
With all base configurations done, we can start defining the necessary cloud resources.
Crossplane requires specific roles and policies to create and manage the compute and
network resources within this solution. These will be the only kind of Managed Resources
used in this solution. The following listing shows one of the configured roles that enables
the creation and management of EKS clusters.
1
apiVersion: iam.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
2
kind: Role
3
metadata:
4
namespace: crossplane -system
5
name: epicshelter -eks-cluster -role
6
spec:
7
forProvider:
8
assumeRolePolicy: |
9
{
10
"Version": "2012-10-17",
11
"Statement": [
12
{
13
"Effect": "Allow",
14
"Principal": {
15
"Service": "eks.amazonaws.com"
16
},
17
"Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
18
}
19
]
20
}
21
---
22
apiVersion: iam.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
23
kind: RolePolicyAttachment
24
metadata:
25
name: epicshelter -eks-cluster -role-policy
26
spec:
27
forProvider:
28
role: epicshelter -eks-cluster -role
29
policyArn: arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSClusterPolicy
Listing 4.12: Application Deployment Manifest
The presented configuration creates the IAM role, allowing EKS to assume it, and then at­
taches AWS’s managed EKS cluster policy, giving EKS the credentials it needs to operate
within the AWS account. However, this role only covers the basic EKS cluster operations.
An additional role and polices are needed for fully administrate the cluster. Together, these
policies give the EKS worker nodes the essential permissions to join the cluster, handle
networking, and pull container images ­ the core functions needed to run workloads. Sim­
ilarly, the EC2 AssumeRole role will be added, providing access to EC2 components. To
this role, the following policies will be added:
• AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy ­ Allows worker nodes to connect to the EKS cluster
and register themselves. It provides the basic permissions needed for nodes to join
the cluster and communicate with the EKS control plane.
• AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy ­ Enables the AWS VPC CNI plugin to manage networking
for Pods. This allows the CNI to assign IP addresses from a VPC to Pods and
manage network interfaces on the worker Nodes.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
39
==PAGE:48==
• AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly ­ Gives worker nodes permission to pull
container images from Amazon ECR (Elastic Container Registry). Without this, your
pods wouldn’t be able to download the Docker images they need to run.
With these policies in place, we can now proceed to create the necessary network and
compute resources, beginning with the network infrastructure. Due to the extensiveness
of both Compositions, the full listing won’t be covered in this document, only some of the
most crucial components. As mentioned on the Primary Building Blocks, the following
listings represent the three main files that enable the creation of a composition.
1
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v2
2
kind: CompositeResourceDefinition
3
metadata:
4
namespace: crossplane -system
5
name: apps.vpc.epicshelter.crossplane.io
6
spec:
7
scope: Cluster
8
group: vpc.epicshelter.crossplane.io
9
names:
10
kind: App
11
plural: apps
12
versions:
13
- name: v1
14
served: true
15
referenceable: true
16
schema:
17
openAPIV3Schema:
18
type: object
19
properties:
20
spec:
21
type: object
22
properties:
23
parameters:
24
type: object
25
properties:
26
region:
27
type: string
28
subnet-az-1:
29
type: string
30
subnet-az-2:
31
type: string
Listing 4.13: Crossplane VPC XRD
1
apiVersion: vpc.epicshelter.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: App
3
metadata:
4
namespace: crossplane -system
5
name: epicshelter -vpc-app
6
spec:
7
parameters:
8
region: eu-central -1
9
subnet -az-1: eu-central -1a
10
subnet -az-2: eu-central -1b
Listing 4.14: Crossplane VPC App
1
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: Composition
3
metadata:
40
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:49==
4
namespace: crossplane -system
5
name: epicshelter -vpc-composition
6
spec:
7
compositeTypeRef:
8
apiVersion: vpc.epicshelter.crossplane.io/v1
9
kind: App
10
mode: Pipeline
11
pipeline:
12
- step: patch-and-transform
13
functionRef:
14
name: function -patch-and-transform
15
input:
16
apiVersion: pt.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
17
kind: Resources
18
resources:
19
- name: epicshelter -vpc
20
base:
21
apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
22
kind: VPC
23
metadata:
24
name: epicshelter -vpc
25
spec:
26
forProvider:
27
region: eu-central -1
28
cidrBlock: 10.0.0.0/16
29
enableDnsHostnames: true
30
enableDnsSupport: true
31
tags:
32
Name: epicshelter -vpc
33
patches:
34
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
35
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
36
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.region"
37
38
- name: epicshelter -igw
39
base:
40
apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
41
kind: InternetGateway
42
metadata:
43
name: epicshelter -igw
44
spec:
45
forProvider:
46
region: eu-central -1
47
tags:
48
Name: epicshelter -igw
49
vpcIdRef:
50
name: epicshelter -vpc
51
patches:
52
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
53
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
54
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.region"
55
56
- name: epicshelter -private -subnet -1
57
base:
58
apiVersion: ec2.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
59
kind: Subnet
60
metadata:
61
name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1a
62
labels:
63
name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1a
64
spec:
65
forProvider:
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
41
==PAGE:50==
66
availabilityZone: eu-central -1a
67
cidrBlock: 10.0.0.0/19
68
region: eu-central -1
69
tags:
70
Name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1a
71
kubernetes.io/role/internal -elb: "1"
72
kubernetes.io/cluster/epicshelter -cluster: "shared"
73
vpcIdRef:
74
name: epicshelter -vpc
75
patches:
76
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
77
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
78
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.region"
79
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
80
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.subnet -az-1"
81
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.availabilityZone"
Listing 4.15: Crossplane VPC App
There’s a lot to unpack in the listings above. Listing 4.13 presents a XRD, a custom API
that specifies the parameters for configuring XR. This XRD will be used by the VPC App
to deploy the VPC XR, a resource that comprehends not only the VPC itself but all the
resources that build upon it, creating the full network infrastructure required for both com­
pute resources and the application. This XRD maintains a simple structure, containing
only three parameters that are crucial for creating the resource: the region where it’s going
to be deployed and the availability zones for both private and public subnets. Listing 4.14
presents the VPC App. Apps were introduced in Crossplane 2.0, removing the need for
awkward abstractions like claims. These act as ”executables” built on top of the XRD’s.
The listing demonstrates how the VPC App operates using its specific XRD, ensuring all
necessary fields are defined and accessible when creating the resources outlined in the
Composition. Crossplane does the link between Apps and XRD’s through the group and
apiVersion parameters present on each file. Listing 4.15 presents the XR itself. In this
listing, the define resources were chosen to demonstrate how they can be connected and
how the parameters defined on the App will be applied on the configuration during the
deployment process. Before the resource definitions, we can see that this XR utilizes the
patch-and-transform function configured earlier. This enables the Composition to pull
parameters from the App and deploy resources with the exact field configurations spec­
ified by the development teams. These parameters are passed onto resources through
the patches defined by the end of each resource. Resources follow the familiar structure
of standard Kubernetes manifests, where each cluster resource requires its own mani­
fest configuration with different specifications, all of which are detailed in the provider’s
official documentation. Relations between components are established in a simple way:
resources like the InternetGateway need to be associates to a VPC, having their own
referencing parameter, like the vpcIdRef. Some other configurations are also applied on
resources with the usage of special tags, as the ones found inside the private subnet:
• kubernetes.io/role/internal-elb: "1" ­ Informs AWS Load Balancer Controller
that this subnet can be used for internal/private load balancers. When creating in­
ternal LoadBalancer services, AWS will place them in subnets with such tag.
• kubernetes.io/cluster/epicshelter-cluster: "shared" ­ This identifies that
the subnet belongs to (or can be shared with) the EKS cluster with the defined name.
This assists AWS to understand which subnets are associated with which clusters,
with special importance for auto­scaling and load balancer placement.
42
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:51==
The entire cloud infrastructure deployment phase happens at a slower pace than the local
one. It is possible to observe the created resources on the AWS Console, although this
doesn’t happen almost instantaneously. In the case of some resources such as the EKS
cluster, it can take more than five minutes to deploy the cluster itself, excluding the worker
nodes. Nonetheless, the association between resources still occurs without any issues.
Only the application components are impacted by this, as they need to be installed within
the cluster following its deployment, preventing a completely automated deployment pro­
cess.
Following the deployment of the network components, the next step involves creating the
compute resources that will host the application workloads. These are done in a very
similar way as the networking ones, in fact, the XRD and App definitions only differ on the
specified parameters. The real difference lies on the XR defined on the listing below.
1
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: Composition
3
metadata:
4
namespace: crossplane -system
5
name: epicshelter -eks-composition
6
spec:
7
compositeTypeRef:
8
apiVersion: eks.epicshelter.crossplane.io/v1
9
kind: App
10
mode: Pipeline
11
pipeline:
12
- step: patch-and-transform
13
functionRef:
14
name: function -patch-and-transform
15
input:
16
apiVersion: pt.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
17
kind: Resources
18
resources:
19
- name: epicshelter -cluster
20
base:
21
apiVersion: eks.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
22
kind: Cluster
23
metadata:
24
annotations:
25
uptest.upbound.io/timeout: "2400"
26
name: epicshelter -cluster
27
spec:
28
forProvider:
29
version: "1.33"
30
region: eu-central -1
31
accessConfig:
32
- authenticationMode: API_AND_CONFIG_MAP
33
roleArnRef:
34
name: epicshelter -eks-cluster -role
35
vpcConfig:
36
- endpointPrivateAccess: false
37
endpointPublicAccess: true
38
subnetIdRefs:
39
- name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1a
40
- name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1b
41
patches:
42
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
43
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
44
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.region"
45
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
43
==PAGE:52==
46
- name: epicshelter -cluster -general -node-group
47
base:
48
apiVersion: eks.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
49
kind: NodeGroup
50
metadata:
51
name: epicshelter -general -node-group
52
spec:
53
forProvider:
54
clusterNameRef:
55
name: epicshelter -cluster
56
nodeRoleArnRef:
57
name: epicshelter -eks-cluster -nodes-role
58
region: eu-central -1
59
capacityType: ON_DEMAND
60
instanceTypes: ["t3.small"]
61
labels:
62
role: general
63
scalingConfig:
64
- desiredSize: 1
65
minSize: 1
66
maxSize: 3
67
subnetIdRefs:
68
- name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1a
69
- name: epicshelter -private -eu-central -1b
70
patches:
71
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
72
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
73
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.region"
74
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
75
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.nodeType"
76
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.instanceTypes"
77
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
78
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.nodeCount"
79
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.scalingConfig[0].desiredSize"
80
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
81
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.maxNodeCount"
82
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.scalingConfig[0].maxSize"
Listing 4.16: Crossplane EKS App
This XR follows a similar configuration to the one seen on the VPC Composition. Re­
sources like the EKS cluster have their own set of parameters, some of which are passed
into the configuration through the App, like the region or the node type in case of the
node group. There is also a clear configuration between components. These interact as
planned, following the established architecture:
• The EKS cluster is connected to the VPC’s private subnets, where it’s workloads
are going to be executed, allowing for a secure, isolated execution while maintaining
necessary outbound connectivity. The same configuration is specified with the node
groups, with the same purpose.
• The EKS cluster is also associated with two node groups, enabling the execution of
workloads across distributed compute resources.
With all the XRs deployed, the AWS Console shows the infrastructure resources running
and available to receive application deployments and execute workloads, as it is possible
to observe on the figures below.
44
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Deployed VPC Resources as Viewed in the AWS Console
Figure 4.8: Deployed EKS Resources as Viewed in the AWS Console
As previously mentioned, the creation of some resources like EKS takes an unpredictable
amount of time to be completely finished. Therefore, it is necessary to validate the full
availability of the cluster before deploying the applications. Once this is validated, the
applications can be deployed, similarly to the local deployment. The deployed applications
can then be accessed as demonstrated in figures 4.7 and 4.8, which show similar outputs
to the local deployment. The listing below presents the corresponding tasks on the Taskfile
for this phase, building upon the previously presented configuration.
1
tasks:
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
45
==PAGE:54==
2
setup-crossplane:
3
desc: Install Crossplane
4
cmds:
5
- echo "----- Setting up Crossplane -----"
6
- helm repo add crossplane -stable https://charts.crossplane.io/stable
7
- helm repo update
8
- helm install crossplane crossplane -stable/crossplane --namespace {{.
CROSSPLANE_NS}} --create-namespace || true
9
- kubectl wait --for=condition=Available deployment/crossplane --
namespace {{.CROSSPLANE_NS}} --timeout=90s
10
11
configure -aws-provider:
12
desc: Configure Amazon Web Services provider
13
cmds:
14
- echo "----- Configuring AWS Provider -----"
15
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace {{.CROSSPLANE_NS}}
16
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/aws-provider.yaml
17
- kubectl wait --for=condition=Healthy providers --all --timeout=90s
18
- kubectl create secret generic aws-secret --from-file=creds=./infra/
crossplane/aws-credentials.txt || true
19
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/aws-provider -config.yaml
20
21
setup-cloud-infra:
22
desc: Deploy cloud infrastructure resources
23
cmds:
24
- echo "----- Setting up AWS resources -----"
25
- kubectl config set-context --current --namespace {{.CROSSPLANE_NS}}
26
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/functions
27
- kubectl wait --for=condition=Healthy functions --all --timeout=90s
28
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/aws/iam
29
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/aws/vpc/vpc-app-xrd.yaml
30
- kubectl apply -f infra/crossplane/aws/eks/eks-app-xrd.yaml
31
- kubectl wait --for=condition=Established xrd --all --timeout=90s
32
- kubectl apply -k infra/crossplane/aws
33
34
deploy:cloud-infra:
35
desc: Complete cloud environment setup and deployment
36
cmds:
37
- task: setup-cluster
38
- task: setup-crossplane
39
- task: configure -aws-provider
40
- task: setup-cloud-infra
41
42
deploy:cloud-app:
43
desc: Application deployment on cloud environment
44
cmds:
45
- aws eks update-kubeconfig --region eu-central -1 --name epicshelter -
cluster --profile borisdvlpr
46
- task: setup-argo
47
- task: setup-network
48
- task: deploy -data
49
- task: deploy -app
Listing 4.17: Application Deployment Manifest
46
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:55==
5
Cloud Provider Migration
The cloud infrastructure presented on this work represents a complete migration from the
original vision. Initially, the entire solution was architected on Google Cloud Platform.
Despite the less mature community and overall support for this provider, GCP provides
stable services with extremely competitive prices, with the current solution having zero
costs on the platform. However, as development progressed, a series of significant chal­
lenges with the Crossplane provider emerged, eventually creating a serious roadblock
that led to a reconsideration of the cloud provider choice. The primary obstacle proved to
be the Google Cloud Crossplane provider itself. Combining recent Crossplane updates,
a thorough re­architecture that resulted in a completely new GCP provider, and poor doc­
umentation coverage created significant incompatibilities when creating resources that
posed serious challenges for development. These technical challenges, combined with
the time constraints of the project, enabled a shift to Amazon Web Services, where the
Crossplane ecosystem proved to be far more mature and reliable. However, despite
the efforts when restructuring the infrastructure definitions, this migration proved the fun­
damental value proposition: through the Kubernetes­based architecture with Apps and
XRDs, migration complexity is greatly minimized as developers only need to create new
resource definitions for the target provider, establishing a consistent layer of stability and
standardization that works seamlessly across multiple cloud platforms.
5.1
A Migration Novel
The original GCP architecture was built around the exact same foundational model that
ended up being successfully deployed on AWS. All the core design elements remained
unchanged. This meant that despite switching cloud providers entirely, the fundamental
framework, resource structures, and deployment processes were designed to work iden­
tically on both platforms, with only the underlying provider­specific configurations needing
adjustment during the transition. However, due to the technical challenges faced during
the initial steps of development, the original architecture was cut down to the most basic
resources. The listing below demonstrates part of that setup.
1
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1
2
kind: Composition
3
metadata:
4
name: gke-cluster
5
spec:
6
compositeTypeRef:
7
apiVersion: compositions.io/v1alpha1
8
kind: XCluster
9
resources:
10
- name: cluster
11
base:
12
apiVersion: container.gcp.upbound.io/v1beta1
13
kind: Cluster
14
metadata:
15
labels:
16
cluster_name: gke
17
spec:
18
forProvider:
19
enableAutopilot: false
20
enableIntranodeVisibility: true
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
47
==PAGE:56==
21
ipAllocationPolicy:
22
- {}
23
initialNodeCount: 1
24
location: europe-west10
25
removeDefaultNodePool: true
26
writeConnectionSecretToRef:
27
name: gke-managed -resources -kubeconfig
28
namespace: upbound -system
29
patches:
30
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
31
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.region"
32
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.location"
33
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
34
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.clusterName"
35
toFieldPath: "metadata.labels.cluster_name"
36
37
- name: nodepool
38
base:
39
apiVersion: container.gcp.upbound.io/v1beta1
40
kind: NodePool
41
spec:
42
forProvider:
43
clusterSelector:
44
matchLabels:
45
cluster_name: gke
46
nodeConfig:
47
- machineType: e2-medium
48
diskSizeGb: 50
49
oauthScopes:
50
- https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform
51
preemptible: true
52
nodeCount: 1
53
patches:
54
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
55
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.machineType"
56
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.nodeConfig[0].machineType"
57
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
58
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.nodeCount"
59
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.nodeCount"
60
- type: FromCompositeFieldPath
61
fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.clusterName"
62
toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.clusterSelector.matchLabels.
cluster_name"
Listing 5.1: Google Kubernetes Engine Composition
This configuration follows the familiar pattern from earlier examples, adapted to Google’s
resource requirements. However, not even the standalone cluster and its associated node
pools would provision successfully. Despite these implementation failures, the underly­
ing XRD and App definitions remained fully portable, preserving the same API structure
while switching the underlying resource creation to AWS. This API preservation enables
development teams to establish consistent standards when deploying cloud applications,
while still maintaining the flexibility to make modifications as needed. Rather than being
rigidly enforced, this approach should be adopted as a guideline to ensure consistency
across cloud deployments, recognizing that requirements evolve over time and there’s
always space for architectural improvements and adaptations.
48
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:57==
6
Vendor Lock­In and US Dependency on
Cloud Providers
The fast adoption of cloud platforms has created significant concerns regarding vendor
lock­in and growing geopolitical dependencies, particularly on US­based cloud providers.
These issues have substantial implications for enterprises worldwide, making it harder to
stay flexible, manage costs effectively, and maintain control over their data and strategic
decisions. This chapter examines these critical issues and their relevance to GitOps­
based infrastructure management approaches.
6.1
Understanding Vendor Lock­In in Cloud Computing
Vendor lock­in occurs when organizations become overly dependent on one cloud provider’s
unique services, making it difficult (and often too expensive) to migrate to alternative plat­
forms. This dependency can show up in many dimensions of cloud infrastructures, such
as:
• Service Lock­in ­ results from depending on proprietary APIs, services and archi­
tectural patterns that are specific to each provider. For example, services like AWS
Lambda, Azure Functions or Google Cloud Functions all follow different program­
ming models and deployment approaches. As a result, organizations that build
their applications heavily dependent of these services frequently face significant re­
engineering issues when trying to move to another platform.
• Data Lock­in ­ represents another important challenge, as the cost and complexity
of transferring large datasets between providers create major obstacles to migra­
tion. High egress fees for data transfers often make it financially heavy to move
terabytes or petabytes of data to another provider. On top of that, the use of propri­
etary database services and storage formats further limits data portability.
• Operational Lock­in ­ happens when organizations build extensive expertise and
operational practices around any particular provider. Even when switching providers
is technically feasible, institutional resistance caused by investments in staff training,
automation, and governance customized for provider­specific solutions makes such
moves challenging.
The financial implications of vendor lock­in extend far beyond the immediate cost of ser­
vices. Organizations may experience unpredictable pricing changes, reduced negotiating
strength, and fewer chances to pursue competitive alternatives. Over time, this depen­
dency can result in higher costs, as providers are aware of the limited flexibility their cus­
tomers have to switch platforms.
6.2
Geopolitical Implications of US Cloud Dominance
With AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud representing about 65% of the global market [20],
US­based providers clearly dominate the cloud computing landscape. This concentration
results in geopolitical dependencies that reach beyond economic factors.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
49
==PAGE:58==
Data sovereignty problems occur when firms organizations outside the United States
store sensitive information on US­controlled infrastructure. Even with local data residency
choices, US corporations often retain ultimate control and legal jurisdiction, leaving foreign
organizations subject to US regulations such as the CLOUD Act and potential government
access requests. As a result, supply chain risks increase as national economies become
more dependent on US cloud infrastructure. Key government functions, financial institu­
tions, and critical sectors are increasingly reliant on these platforms, providing potential
power in international relations. Key government services, financial systems, and vital
industries increasingly rely on these platforms, creating potential leverage in international
relations. Recent geopolitical conflicts also highlight how such dependencies can be used
as tools of economic authority. Regulatory compliance challenges grow as nations imple­
ment stronger data protection and digital sovereignty regulations. Frameworks such as
the EU’s GDPR and China’s Cybersecurity Law frequently contradict with US regulatory
standards, creating significant challenges for enterprises that rely on US cloud providers.
Innovation dependencies pose long­term strategic risks as well. Organizations whose
applications are deeply dependent on services provided by US cloud providers may have
their technical growth limited by decisions driven primarily by US market interests and
regulatory considerations. This dependency is especially evident in emerging technol­
ogy areas such as AI/ML services, edge computing capabilities, and specialized industry
solutions, where US providers may prioritize features that serve their domestic market
needs or comply with US regulatory frameworks that differ significantly from European
requirements. Furthermore, the centralization of innovation within a few major US cor­
porations creates a risk of technological monoculture, where alternative approaches to
cloud architecture, data processing, or service delivery models may be overlooked or
abandoned in favor of solutions that align with the dominant providers’ business models
and technical philosophies, leading to European organizations unintentionally adopting
technology stacks that are not optimally suited to their specific regulatory environment,
business practices, or long­term strategic objectives, potentially impeding their ability to
develop competitive advantages in the global market.
6.3
Mitigation Strategies and the Role of GitOps
Organizations are implementing measures to limit vendor lock­in and geopolitical depen­
dence while maintaining the advantages of cloud computing. These efforts often focus
on architectural designs and operational practices that promote portability and provider
independence.
Multi­cloud and hybrid methods strategies represent fundamental approaches to minimiz­
ing the dependency on single cloud providers by distributing workloads across multiple
platforms or combining on­premises infrastructure with cloud deployments. This diversifi­
cation strategy offers organizations increases on flexibility while lowering the risk of ven­
dor lock­in by avoiding total reliance on a single provider’s ecosystem. However, these
approaches increase operational complexity significantly. Organizations must manage
different APIs, pricing models, security frameworks, and operational procedures across
multiple platforms. Additionally, while multi­cloud strategies reduce single­vendor depen­
dency, they may still leave organizations tied to provider­specific services when apps use
unique features or proprietary tools provided by individual providers.
Container­based abstractions emerge as a supplementary option in this scenario, encap­
sulating applications in portable containers that remain consistent across different cloud
50
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:59==
platforms. This containerization approach allows applications to function with minimal
changes regardless of the underlying infrastructure, providing a foundation for real multi­
cloud portability. Kubernetes has become a key component of modern cloud­native de­
ployment strategies, providing a consistent orchestration layer that abstracts infrastruc­
ture differences across different cloud environments. This standardization allows enter­
prises to deploy and manage applications with the same tools, regardless of the provider.
Building upon these foundational strategies, IaC and GitOps principles also offer signifi­
cant approaches to overcoming vendor lock­in problems. By treating infrastructure con­
figuration as versioned code stored in Git repositories, organizations can maintain total
visibility and control over their infrastructure definitions. This approach allows compa­
nies to transition from manual, provider­specific infrastructure management to declara­
tive, version­controlled operations. GitOps workflows build on these benefits by making
Git repositories the single source of truth for both application and infrastructure states. Or­
ganizations achieve greater portability and drastically reduce reliance on provider­specific
deployment tools and dashboards by implementing automated deployment pipelines that
sync the required state from Git to the target environment. This declarative approach al­
lows for easy migration of infrastructure specifications between providers, as the same
Git­based processes can target different Kubernetes clusters regardless of hosting envi­
ronment.
Open­source technologies are expanding cloud portability by providing standardized al­
ternatives to proprietary services. Tools like Crossplane provide a unified control plane
with standardized APIs for managing resources across providers, while solutions like
Apache Kafka for messaging, PostgreSQL for databases, and CNCF container man­
agement projects reduce the reliance on vendor­specific services. Together, these ap­
proaches allow enterprises to define infrastructure declaratively while remaining flexible
across several platforms, minimizing technical lock­in.
6.4
Implications for Modern Infrastructure Management
The combination of vendor lock­in issues with GitOps principles offers new opportuni­
ties for enterprises to preserve strategic flexibility while using cloud capabilities. GitOps
workflows, supported by tools like ArgoCD for continuous deployment and Crossplane for
infrastructure provisioning, enable provider­agnostic infrastructure management through
declarative configuration management and automated reconciliation processes. This ap­
proach reflects a broader industry trend toward cloud­native architectures that prioritize
portability, scalability, and operational consistency across a variety of computing environ­
ments. By adopting these practices, organizations can limit their risk to vendor lock­in
while maintaining the agility and efficiency of cloud computing. GitOps’ declarative style
ensures that infrastructure state is transparent and reproducible, while version control
provides audit trails and rollback tools to improve operational reliability. Furthermore,
GitOps standardizes deployment processes, reducing the specific knowledge necessary
to manage numerous cloud platforms and allowing teams to maintain similar workflows
regardless of the underlying infrastructure provider.
At the same time, achieving true provider independence demands careful architectural
planning and often involves trade­offs in feature availability, performance, and operational
complexity. Organizations may have to give up on provider­specific managed services in
favor of open­source alternatives, potentially losing certain optimization benefits or in­
curring additional operational overhead. They also must balance these aspects against
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
51
==PAGE:60==
their priorities for flexibility, cost control, and risk management, recognizing that the opti­
mal balance varies based on organizational maturity, technical knowledge and strategic
objectives.
52
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:61==
7
Future Works
The GitOps­based architecture presented in this thesis demonstrates the possibility of
controlling cloud infrastructure with local Kubernetes clusters using declarative tools like
ArgoCD and Crossplane. While the current implementation covers the basic criteria for
infrastructure provisioning and management, there are still ways to improve scalability,
resiliency, maintainability and operational efficiency. This chapter presents possible future
research directions that could strengthen and extend the proposed solution.
7.1
Project Restructuring for Enhanced Modularity
The current monolithic infrastructure compositions present opportunities for architectural
improvement. Future work should focus on decomposing these complex compositions
into smaller, logically grouped components. This restructuring would create modular com­
positions organized around functional boundaries such as networking, security, storage,
and compute resources. Such modularity would deliver several benefits: clearer separa­
tion of concerns for improved maintainability, enhanced reusability of infrastructure pat­
terns, and streamlined debugging and troubleshooting processes. Additionally, smaller
compositions would enable more granular version control and deployment strategies, al­
lowing teams to update specific infrastructure components independently.
7.2
Leveraging Crossplane 2.0
The introduction of Crossplane 2.0’s global configuration features presents a significant
opportunity for architectural improvement. These capabilities allow common values and
settings to be defined once and shared across multiple cloud providers, reducing dupli­
cation and ensuring consistency in multi­cloud deployments. Future work should explore
leveraging global configurations to standardize parameters such as tagging strategies,
naming conventions, security policies, and compliance requirements across all cloud re­
sources. This approach would reduce the complexity of maintaining consistent configu­
rations in heterogeneous environments while improving operational efficiency.
A strategic shift from creating separate applications for each XR to adopting a single
application per cloud provider could significantly simplify the overall architecture. This
consolidation would take advantage of Crossplane’s global configuration capabilities to
manage multiple resource types within consolidated applications, reducing the operational
overhead of maintaining numerous applications.
Such a simplified model would also enhance the GitOps workflow by reducing synchro­
nization points and simplifying application topology. Furthermore, it would improve ob­
servability by providing consolidated views of all resources per cloud provider, enabling
clearer understanding of infrastructure dependencies and resource relationships.
7.3
Cloud Architecture Optimization
Despite addressing the issues identified during the analysis process, the cloud infras­
tructure architecture could benefit from improvements such as the integration of a load
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
53
==PAGE:62==
balancer, helping to distribute traffic more evenly, or a cluster autoscaler, enabling the
specification of rules such as the prioritization of spot instances for workloads, significantly
reducing compute costs. It should also integrate advanced monitoring and observability
capabilities to provide comprehensive insights into infrastructure state and operational
metrics. Developing robust alerting and notification systems that deliver contextual infor­
mation about infrastructure changes and their potential impact would significantly improve
operational efficiency and reduce mean time to resolution.
54
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:63==
8
Conclusion
This thesis has presented a comprehensive analysis and architecture that addresses the
growing need for scalable, resilient, and portable cloud applications facing today’s rapid
adoption of cloud computing. By integrating GitOps principles with local Kubernetes clus­
ters and leveraging key technologies such as Crossplane and ArgoCD, the proposed
solution offers a paradigm shift from traditional cloud application architectures.
The requirements analysis established five critical areas for cloud applications: scalability
for handling different workload demands, resilience to maintain operations during failures,
cloud agnosticism to prevent vendor dependency, strong networking capabilities, and reli­
able CI/CD processes. Through a detailed examination of traditional approaches, several
significant limitations became apparent, including vendor lock­in and limited operational
flexibility. These challenges highlighted the need for an alternative architectural approach
that could provide better portability while maintaining performance and reliability. The
proposed GitOps based architecture addresses these limitations through a declarative,
version­controlled approach to infrastructure and application management. Crossplane
integration improves cloud agnosticism by abstracting infrastructure provisioning across
multiple providers, while ArgoCD provides continuous deployment with automated syn­
chronization between desired and actual states. The local Kubernetes cluster foundation
creates a consistent operational environment independent of underlying cloud infrastruc­
ture while providing a unified development environment. The practical implementation
demonstrated the architecture’s viability in real­world scenarios, validating its ability to de­
liver on the identified requirements. The architecture builds on well established networking
capabilities as its foundation, supporting complex application topologies while maintain­
ing security and performance. This networking foundation enables two key capabilities:
scalability through Kubernetes’ native orchestration and Crossplane’s dynamic resource
provisioning, and resiliency through distributed deployments, automated failover mecha­
nisms, and GitOps­based recovery procedures. The GitOps approach further enhances
these capabilities by treating infrastructure as code and enabling automated, trackable
deployments that can quickly scale resources or recover from failures.
However, this approach comes with some important considerations. Organizations need
to invest in building GitOps expertise and setting up proper governance frameworks. Man­
aging multiple tools and abstractions adds complexity that requires careful coordination
and monitoring. While the architecture reduces vendor dependence, the initial setup and
configuration still demands considerable planning and technical knowledge.
In conclusion, the presented GitOps­driven architecture with local Kubernetes clusters
offers a compelling solution for organizations seeking to build scalable, resilient, and
portable cloud applications. By addressing the limitations of traditional approaches and
providing a comprehensive framework for modern cloud­native development, this archi­
tecture represents a significant step forward in cloud application design. The findings from
this work contribute to understanding cloud­native architectures and offer both organiza­
tions and engineers a framework for implementing modern cloud applications.
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:65==
Acronyms
AI Artificial Intelligence. iii
API Application Program Interface. 2, 7, 8, 14, 17, 18, 20, 21, 25, 28, 29, 34, 35, 37
AWS Amazon Web Services. iii, 1, 17, 25, 38, 39, 44, 47
AZ Availability Zone. 17
CDK Cloud Development Kit. 1
CI/CD Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery. 3, 10
CNI Container Network Interface. 9, 10, 28, 39
EKS Elastic Kubernetes Service. 17, 39, 44, 45
GCP Google Cloud Platform. 1, 47
HPA Horizontal Pod Autoscaler. 4, 6
IaC Infrastructure as Code. 1, 2, 7, 13, 14, 18, 37
IGW Internet Gateway. 17
KDI Kubernetes Driven Infrastructure. 2
MR Managed Resource. 25, 39
OCI Open Container Initiative. 8
PVC Persistent Volume Claim. 5
RDS Relational Database Service. 25
RPC Remote Procedure Calls. 7
VPC Virtual Private Cloud. 17, 38, 39, 42, 44
XR Composite Resource. 8, 25, 30, 37, 38, 42–44, 53
XRD Composite Resource Definition. 2, 8, 16, 18, 25, 38, 42, 43
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
Luciano Mammino and James Eastham. Crafting Lambda Functions in Rust. 2024.
URL: https://rust-lambda.com/.
[2]
Jimmy Dahlqvist. Building Resilient Serverless Workloads: Navigating Through Fail­
ures. 2024. URL: https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = CqI0QVN _ xNU & list =
PLGPzSTy-uUmMsiuuBkzTCSwm88k5hTwVe&index=9.
[3]
What is Scalability in Cloud Computing? Types and Benefits. URL: https://www.
nops.io/blog/cloud-scalability/.
[4]
Kubernetes Docs. URL: https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/.
[5]
Lily Puspa Dewi et al. “Server Scalability Using Kubernetes”. In: 4th Technology
Innovation Management and Engineering Science International Conference (2019).
DOI: 10.1109/TIMES-iCON47539.2019.9024501. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/5e8b1bc8d9001d01dd3bf3db.
[6]
Abdul Karim Bangura. Knowledge Production and Management in Africa. Pallgrave
Macmilan, 2025.
[7]
José Flora et al. “A Study on the Aging and Fault Tolerance of Microservices in
Kubernetes”. In: Ieee Access ­ 2022, Volume 10 (2022). DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2022.3231191. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/63d720b4f31a0a1e04589b88.
[8]
Zihao Chen, Mohammad Goudarzi, and Adel Nadjaran Toosi. “Resilience Evalua­
tion of Kubernetes in Cloud­Edge Environments via Failure Injection”. In: ­ (2025).
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.16109. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16109.
[9]
David Elliott et al. “A Cloud­Agnostic Container Orchestrator for Improving Inter­
operability”. In: Ieee International Conference on Cloud Computing, Cloud ­ 2018,
Volume 2018 (2018). DOI: 10.1109/CLOUD.2018.00145. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/
en/catalog/5d0891a5d9001d01aa38498a.
[10]
Francesco Minna et al. “Understanding the Security Implications of Kubernetes Net­
working”. In: Ieee Security and Privacy — 2021, Volume 19, Issue 5 (2021). DOI:
10.1109/MSEC.2021.3094726. URL: https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/
document/9497237.
[11]
Grzegorz Stencel and Luca Berton. Kubernetes Recipes. Apress, 2025.
[12]
Peter Wörndle, Stephen Terrill, and Torsten Dinsing. “Automating telecom software
deployment with GitOps”. In: Ericsson Technology Review — 2023, Volume 2023,
Issue 2 (2023). DOI: 10.23919/etr.2023.10173781. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
ielx7/9881227/10173780/10173781.pdf.
[13]
Crossplane Docs. URL: https://docs.crossplane.io/v2.0/.
[14]
ArgoCD Docs. URL: https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
[15]
Devbox Docs. URL: https://www.jetify.com/docs/devbox/.
[16]
Helm Docs. URL: https://helm.sh/docs/.
[17]
Kind Docs. URL: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/.
[18]
Kustomize Docs. URL: https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/references/kustomize/.
[19]
Task Docs. URL: https://taskfile.dev/docs/guide.
[20]
Cloud infrastructure services vendor market share worldwide from fourth quarter
2017 to fourth quarter 2024. 2025. URL: https : / / www . statista . com / statistics /
967365/worldwide-cloud-infrastructure-services-market-share-vendor/.
58
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
==PAGE:67==
Ensuring Resilience in Enterprise Cloud
59
==PAGE:68==
”Everything fails all the time.”
­ Werner Vogels, CTO, Amazon Web Services
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
