==PAGE:1==
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthope-
dic surgery
Master Thesis
DTU Biomedical Engineering
Department of Biomedical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
Master Thesis
27 July, 2025
By
Benjamin Tang Hallengreen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biomedical Engineering, ØrstedsPlads,
Building 348C, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/msc-programmes/
biomedical-engineering
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Biomechanics
at Bispebjerg Hospital, Department of Biomedical Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Benjamin Tang Hallengreen - s182765
ii
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
EN:
This thesis presents a proof-of-concept study exploring the design, fabrication and
mechanical evaluation of personalized clamp attachments for use in orthopedic
surgery. Conventional reduction clamps often falls short or deems somewhat chal-
lenging due to a lack of anatomic conformity. Therefore, to address this challenge,
a patient specific clamp solution was developed using stereolithographic printing
technology, based on CT images of a synthetic fractured tibia plateau model.
The workflow was composed of a digital reconstruction of the bone anatomy via a
isosurfacing algorithm, computed aided design of anatomically conforming clamp
attachments using blender and fabrication of designs.
A total of five indistin-
guishable designs were produced, accounting for varying geometrical features,
selected ideal candidates was subjected to mechanical testing, including static
friction tests and compressive strength evaluations.
While clinical implementation was not tested, the results presented throughout this
thesis demonstrates a concept of personalized reduction clamp attachment that
has the ability to interface with both bone and existing reduction clamps. The final
iteration design yielded promising results in terms of peak load reaching of 1850
N. Despite the unsolved challenges concerning the experimental reproducibility
and frictional fixation, this thesis lays the foundation for future development and
clinical evaluation of a personalized attachment to reduction clamps.
DA:
Dette speciale præsenterer et proof-of-concept-studie, der undersøger design,
fremstilling og mekanisk evaluering af personlige klemme-tilføjelser til brug i or-
topædkirurgi. Konventionelle reduktionsklemmer viser sig ofte utilstrækkelige eller
udfordrende, især grundet manglende anatomisk tilpasning. For at imødekomme
denne udfordring blev der derfor udviklet en patient-specifik klemmeløsning ved
brug af stereolitografisk 3D-printteknologi baseret på CT-billeder af en syntetisk
tibia-plateau frakturmodel.
Arbejdsprocessen bestod af digital rekonstruktion af knogleanatomi via en isosurface-
algoritme, computerstøttet design af anatomisk tilpassede klemme-tilføjelser i Blender
og efterfølgende fremstilling af disse. I alt blev fem forskellige designvarianter pro-
duceret, hver med varierende geometriske egenskaber. Udvalgte og ideelle de-
signs blev herefter underlagt mekanisk testning, herunder måling af statisk friktion
og trykstyrke.
Selvom klinisk implementering ikke blev afprøvet, demonstrerer resultaterne i
dette speciale et koncept for en personlig reduktionsklemme-tilføjelse, som po-
tentielt kan kobles til både knogle og eksisterende klemmetyper. Den sidste de-
signiteration viste lovende resultater med en maksimal belastning på op til 1850
N. På trods af uløste udfordringer med forsøgsreproducerbarhed og friktionel fik-
sering, udgør dette arbejde et fundament for videreudvikling og klinisk evaluering
af en personlig tilføjelse til reduktionsklemmer.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Benjamin Tang Hallengreen, MSc Biomedical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Først og fremmest skal lyde en kæmpe tak til mine 3 vejledere Arvind, Tine og
Rene, i har på hver jeres måde understøttet mig i at være den bedste mulige spe-
icale studerende, et specielt tak til Rene for at sidde weekender og sene aftener
for at give mig feedback på projektet, især da vi lakkede mod enden, derudover
skal der lyde et kæmpe tak for lån af laboratorie til Fast-gruppen på DTU healt-
tech, projektet var ikke blevet til noget, havde det ikke været fordi i var så søde at
lukke mig ind.
Derudover kan jeg nok ikke se mig fri fra at takke mine familie og venner, men det
er mest fordi jeg holder så meget af jer, specielt Ida, Joakim, John, Silas, Nicolai
og Otto har været instumentale for en virkelig god tid på DTU.
sidst vil jeg gerne takke dig min kæreste Klara. Du ved om noget, hvor meget jeg
har kæmpet. Min tid på DTU har bestemt ikke været noget dans på roser, men
du har altid været der for mig og det kan jeg kun takke dig for.
iv
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Orthopedics and reduction clamps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods
15
2.1
Initialization of the bone model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Design of Personalized Clamp Attachment
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
3D Printing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Mechanical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Materials
25
4
Results and design considerations
27
4.1
Digitization pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
3D printing and design results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Mechanical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Designing and material choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Digitalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.8
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
49
A.1 Image of Universal testing machine used for mechanical tests . . .
49
A.2 Python code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.3 Proof of construction of plane from 3 points . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.4 Formlabs Biomed black 4.1 datasheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.5 Marching cubes algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.6 Biomed Amber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Objective outlines for this thesis surrounding a personalized ortho-
pedic clamp attachment. Phase I (green) corresponds to objective
which can completed without surgeon and phase II (orange) cor-
responds to testing the clinical advantages of said personal clamp
attachment along with automatization of the design process.
. . .
2
1.2
Illustration of different fracture types in orthopedics surgery deemed
relevant for this study, adapted from [1]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Images of the synthetic bone model with and without artificial soft
tissue, mat.3 used for the development of a personalized clamp
attachment with and without soft tissue. Pictures from [10] . . . . .
4
1.4
Overview of the project process plan for goals achieved for this
thesis, the marked green cells corresponds to the goals of this the-
sis, and the blue corresponds to goals beyond this thesis, however
mentioned to reveal the further scope of this PCA concept.
. . . .
5
1.5
Illustration of the theoretical framework and geometric principals of
a cone-beam CT scanner adapted from [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Houndsfields units and their relation to artifacts in the body depicted
on a relative scale, taken from [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
This is a image of how window width and window center impacts
the resolution of a CT image from [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8
Figure of the flying edges algorithm on the second iteration (black
line surrounding the dots), image adapted from [18]
. . . . . . . .
9
1.9
Illustration of fracture plane on a transverse fracture and reduction
using a standard reduction clamp (grey) and permanent fixation
/(yellow), illustration from [21]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.10 Overview of the AO/OTA classification for fracture types, image
adapted from [22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.11 Stress-strain curve describing the basic principals off plastic and
elastic deformation in terms of the stress and strain exerted on a
unit. Image adapted from [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.12 Illustration of the general setup for a SLA 3D printer as described
in 1.3.5, image adapted from [25] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.13 Image of 3 different types of reduction clamp used for reduction of
syndermosis, a) crossing K-wire fixation, b) bone reduction forceps
and c) collinear reduction clamp, image adapted from [30] . . . . .
14
1.14 Overview of current technological progression in the field of applied
3D printing in healthcare, image adapted from [31] . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1
Image of the cone beam CT scanner used to capture the right knee
bone model, both with and without artificial skin. Scans were per-
formed at Bispebjerg Hospital.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
vi
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:9==
2.2
Snapshot of the custom-built 2D DICOM viewer implemented in
Python 3, displaying the bone model with artificial skin. Hounsfield
units. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Animated DICOM slice viewer implemented in Python, showing an
axial scroll-through of the scanned bone model. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Effect of varying Gaussian filter settings applied to the bone model
after the resulting digitization described in 1.3.2.
. . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Preliminary image generated from the flying edges algorithm de-
scribed in 1.3.2 and implemented in the scripts listed in A.2, as
seen this computation of the model does not include tendons, which
was subsequently included in the figures used for the design of the
clamp solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Mesh representations of the bone model using two different poly-
gon resolutions and generation methods.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Comparison of the physical standard clamp (left) and its digital coun-
terpart (right) following 3D reconstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
First-generation clamp attachment design based on the methodol-
ogy described, the PCS corresponds to the cylindrical structures
engulfing the medial side of the tibia fracture and the lateral side of
tibia. Note: the model is mirrored, with the medial side facing to the
left in the current Blender orientation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.9
Laboratory equipment used during the SLA printing workflow. . . .
22
2.10 Schematics of the mechanical first mechanical test described, a
test of the friction between the PCA and the artificial bone given
a applied force in the x-direction, both the clamp and the clamp
attachment was tested in this setup. The relevant forces applied
on the system is depicted on this force diagram.
. . . . . . . . . .
23
2.11 mechanical testing part II, mechanical compression test of PCA so-
lution. The PCA was mounted and displaced in the negative y-
direction (into the artificial bone), the forces exerted on the PCA
is depicted on this illustration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.12 Illustation of the third mechanical test conducted for this study, a
compression until fracture test of the PCA. The PCA was fixated
and displaced into the fixation platform until total fracture and the
maximal compressive force of the PCA was determined. . . . . . .
24
4.1
PCA design iteration 4 with rotating head concept. (a) Sectional
view of the encasing and rotating mechanism. (b) CAD visualization
in Blender. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
This is a overview of all of the prints, the requirements and experi-
ments conducted throughout this thesis yielded a total of 32 prints
(31 visible in the image) for 5 different iterations atoned by a red
box on the image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Printed 3D reduction clamp attachments for each iteration at the set
at the appropriate reduction site on the artificial bone found through
blender. This similarly resembles the preliminary experiment con-
ducted on all types of prints to determine the functionality. . . . . .
30
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.4
Comparison of the experimental setup for determinations of the
static friction between clamp and PCS friction . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Graph of the force [N] as a function of time [s] for the PCA genera-
tion 5 compressed against the artificial bone surface. . . . . . . . .
33
4.6
Compressive test of the maximum compressive force [N] as a func-
tion of time [s] exerted on the PCA gen. 4 until fracture of the model. 34
4.7
Compressive test, force [N] as a function of time [s] of the maximum
compressive force until failure of PCA gen. 5 (small spikes) until
fracture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Image of the compressive test of the PCA gen. 5 (small spikes) 4.7
at t=4 s, here can be seen visible indents in the bone topology
. .
35
4.9
Overview of vectors (black) resembling the direction of interests,
seen on the image is the optimal clamping side for both the lateral
and medical side, a arbitrary normal vector of the fracture plane,
and a vector representing the PCA clamping direction. Due to a
angular difference of 31 ◦
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.10 Attempted implementation of watershed algorithm, for this iteration
there is a far to great segmentation, and large parts due to over-
shoot of edges has been falsely misclassified as empty, therefore
the model appears hollow at places. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.11 Image of the medial side of the right knee model converted to a
mesh structure using flying edges algorithm described in 1.3.2, the
hole on the surface is a direct result of the usage of the algorithm
flying edges.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.1 Image of the testing machine used for mechanical test of the clamp
solution, the particular model used for experiments for this thesis
was the 50 kN model. Image from [38] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
viii
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
4.1
Overview of the five generations of the personalized clamp attach-
ment, describing the key optimized features and dimensional changes
from one iteration to the next. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Table of the results of measure maximum static friction f max
s
[N] for
3 different configurations of the PCA and one test for a standard
clamp, mat. 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Post-cured material properties of interest for the PCA device, both
for Formlabs Black Resin v4.1 and BioMed Amber Resin. Data
obtained from [34]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
ix
==PAGE:12==
Nomenclature
σ
Standard deviation (Gaussian filter)
σmax
Maximum stress
ε
Strain
AO/OTA Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen / Orthopaedic Trauma
Association
CAD Computer-Aided Design
DLP Digital Light Processing
E
Young’s or Flexural Modulus
Fclamp Force exerted by the clamp
Fhand Force applied by surgeon’s hand
fs,max Maximum static friction
FDM Fused Deposition Modeling
FE
Flying Edges
M1, M2 Moments in the lever principle
MC
Marching Cubes
PCA Personalized Clamp Attachment (preferred term, replaces PSA)
PreForm Formlabs slicing and print preparation software
SLS
Selective Laser Sintering
TKA Total Knee Arthroplasty
UTS Ultimate Tensile Strength
V OI
Volume of Interest
x
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
This chapter presents a proof-of-concept study exploring a personalized approach
to optimizing the reduction phase of orthopedic surgery by using stereolithographic
3D printing to fabricate patient-specific attachments for reduction clamps. Through-
out the chapter there will be a explanation for the background of three dimensional-
printing in medical settings, along with project objectives for a proposed solution
of a personalized clamp attachment, along with a presentation of the underlying
theory used throughout this thesis, along with state-of-the-art technology in the
fields of orthopedics regarding three-dimensional printing.
1.0.1
Motivation
When a patient is admitted to the hospital with a fracture, clinical evaluation begins
with diagnostic imaging, typically in the form of computed tomography (CT) scans,
to assess the extent and complexity of the injury [1]. Based on these findings, the
most appropriate surgical intervention is planned. However, the reduction phase,
realigning and stabilizing fractured bone segments is often described as stress-
ful and challenging when using, especially in more complex fractures [2].Said re-
duction clamps are commonly used to temporarily secure bone fragments during
surgical fixation (illustrated on fig. 1.13. While these tools are generally effec-
tive, particularly in standard procedures such as arthroplasty [3], their limitations
become apparent in complex fracture types, such as comminuted or segmental
fractures, where multiple fragments must be aligned with high precision[4].
In such cases, conventional clamps may lack the anatomical conformity and me-
chanical stability required, increasing the risk of fragment misalignment and pro-
longing operative time. This underlines a need for customized, patient-specific
solutions that can enhance the accuracy and efficiency of intraoperative reduc-
tion [5].
In response to these challenges, recent years have seen significant advance-
ments in technical adjuncts for orthopedic surgery. These include modalities such
as augmented reality and robotic assistance [6], 3D-printing. 3D printing, has
found widespread application in the preoperative phase for producing anatomical
models, surgical guides, and simulation tools [7], [8]. Unlike augmented reality
and robotic systems, which often entail high capital investment, complex infras-
tructure, and ongoing maintenance requirements, 3D printing offers a compara-
tively low-cost, scalable, and accessible solution. Its flexibility and ease of integra-
tion into existing surgical workflows make it particularly well-suited for widespread
clinical adoption [9], especially in resource-constrained settings. This cost-effectiveness,
combined with its capacity for anatomical customization, positions 3D printing as
a highly pragmatic and transformative tool in advancing personalized orthopedic
care. Therefore this thesis aims to use 3D printing for the development of a per-
sonalized clamp attachment tailored for the reduction phase of the orthopedic
surgery. The ultimate goal is to reduce the time required for reduction and im-
prove the stability of fragment alignment during surgery, which would decrease
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
1
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.1: Objective outlines for this thesis surrounding a personalized orthope-
dic clamp attachment. Phase I (green) corresponds to objective which can com-
pleted without surgeon and phase II (orange) corresponds to testing the clinical
advantages of said personal clamp attachment along with automatization of the
design process.
the overall operation time, and minimizing the risk of realignment.
1.0.2
Project Objectives
To evaluate the feasibility of the proposed solution, a model of a right knee tibial
plateau fracture will be used as fracute model for the first iteration of personalized
clamp attachments. CT imaging of this model will be acquired and subsequently
converted into a digital 3D reconstruction. Leveraging principles of biomechanics
and planar geometry, an optimized clamp attachment will be digitally designed
to conform to the anatomical and fracture-specific features of the model. This
custom attachment will then be fabricated using stereolithographic 3D printing
and subjected to a series of mechanical tests and then subject to further clinical
tests with emphasis on its usability and the quality of reduction it facilitates. These
objectives are in presented on fig. 1.1.
2
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.2: Illustration of different fracture types in orthopedics surgery deemed
relevant for this study, adapted from [1]
1.1
Background
Current technologies for orthopedic surgery, especially regarding 3D-printing often
revolves around patient specific solutions given a rapid increase in technological
advancement and in the accessibility of said technology and be elaborated further
in 1.4,
Orthopedic surgery often involves the challenging task of realigning and stabilizing
fractured bones. Among the widely available standard tools, while these standard
reduction clamps proves effective in many cases such as those encountered in
arthroplasty [3], these clamps can present limitations in more complex fracture
scenarios. In particular, comminuted or segmental fractures, where multiple bone
fragments must be aligned precisely, often require highly adaptable fixation strate-
gies. Standard reduction clamps may not provide the necessary geometric con-
formity or stability, potentially leading to misalignment and prolonged operative
time. Given the technological advancement in the field of 3-D printing in the field
of orthopedics, a solution to this problem is could be examined, a patient-specific
solutions for surgical reduction clamps that enhance the precision and efficiency
of intraoperative bone fragment manipulation. [5]
1.2
Orthopedics and reduction clamps
Although a wide variety of fracture types occurs some of which are depicted in
??, the most interesting for this study, are the ones listed below, as they often
require expansive and careful pre-operative planning for the doctor to succeed
the planned operation.
• Compound Fracture: Characterized by a break that pierces the soft tissue.
• Comminuted Fracture: Involves the bone shattering into multiple irregular
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
3
==PAGE:16==
fragments.
• Segmental Fracture: The bone is fractured in multiple places, resulting in
separate, unconnected segments.
These types of fractures (illustated on 1.2 often require internal or external fixation
methods, with reduction clamps playing a crucial role during alignment. However,
traditional clamp designs rely heavily on generalized assumptions about fracture
planes, which are typically identified preoperatively through imaging and experi-
ence. These generalized fracture planes can introduce alignment errors during
the surgical procedure, leading to complications such as instability, misalignment,
or the need for revision surgery. In order to solve this problem, a personalized
clamp solution will be derived and tested for a single type of fracture, a right knee
fractured tibia synthetic bone model as depicted in figure 1.3. In order to prove
the concept, there will be a series of mechanical tests of the structural integrity of
the 3D-printed models in environments resembling those of a orthopedic opera-
tion as well as examination of the easy-of-use and the overall reduction time, in
order to report the viability of these PCA. Likewise it is an objective throughout
the thesis, that the designing phase is to be optimized and automated as much
as time allows to increase the scalability and ease of production of said PCA.
(a) Image of the synthetic bone model used
throughout this thesis for development of a
personalized reduction clamp attachment,
this is a surgical training model of a frac-
tured tibia on the right knee with synthetic
soft tissue
(b) Image of the synthetic bone model used
throughout this thesis for development of a
personalized reduction clamp attachment,
this is a surgical training model of a frac-
tured tibia on the right knee without syn-
thetic soft tissue
Figure 1.3: Images of the synthetic bone model with and without artificial soft
tissue, mat.3 used for the development of a personalized clamp attachment with
and without soft tissue. Pictures from [10]
While the immediate scope is to assess the mechanical viabilty of such solution,
the broader vision includes integration into a Personalized Clamp Attachment
(PCA) that could streamline fracture reduction across a wide range of complex
cases.
Using a specific model, this study will present a single type personalized clamp
solution, that will be designed using a 3D computer graphic tool, on a digitalized
4
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.4: Overview of the project process plan for goals achieved for this the-
sis, the marked green cells corresponds to the goals of this thesis, and the blue
corresponds to goals beyond this thesis, however mentioned to reveal the further
scope of this PCA concept.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
5
==PAGE:18==
high-resolution 3D model of this right knee bone model. This model will be digitally
constructed using CT-images of the model.
The central issue addressed in this thesis is the mismatch between standard re-
duction clamp designs and the individualized anatomy of complex fractures. This
thesis aims to utilize the before mentioned personalization of 3D-printing [11] in
orthopedics to create, design and streamline a process of personalized additional
reduction clamp attachments achieving stable and precise reductions and a de-
crease of reduction time.
The primary objective of this study is to determine whether a personalized reduc-
tion clamp attachment designed on the fracture model geometry presented on
fig. 1.3 can improve surgical outcomes in two key areas:
1. Reduced Time-to-Reduction: By streamlining the alignment process through
better fit and stability.
2. Increased Reduction Stability: Enhancing the likelihood of proper align-
ment throughout the procedure.
This process utilize preoperative imaging data, to design and fabricate patient-
specific clamp attachments, that would conform the unique bone geometry. There-
fore this study will focus on evaluating four core proof-of-concept criteria, as illus-
trated in Figure 1.4. These criteria include:
• Demonstration of feasible personalization of reduction clamp attachments
using preoperative imaging.
• Assessment mechanical stability through experimental testing.
• Evaluation of reduction accuracy compared to standard clamps.
• Preliminary analysis of workflow integration and potential impact on surgical
time.
Ultimately, this project will tap into the ongoing shift toward precision medicine
in surgical practice. The long-term vision is to streamline the process to a point
where it becomes practical by the surgeon in a clinical setting.
1.3
Theory
Given the overall achievements for the personalized reduction clamp attachment
has been presented, the underlying theory behind the tools used in order to design,
fabricate and test these attachments is presented in the following section.
1.3.1
computed tomography and imaging
Computed tomography is a medical imaging technology for obtaining internal im-
ages of using X-ray photon passing through a object and converting the measured
photons back into electrons. Given a human body varies in density, this will alter
the image produces by CT [12]. This CT imaging technology has been utilized to
capture images for this bone models on fig. 1.3, and these were captured on a
cone CT scanner, mat. 3. CBCT is a derivative multi detector CT imaging tech-
nique, which has great dimensional accuracy and high spatial resolution, but is
6
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.5: Illustration of the theoretical framework and geometric principals of a
cone-beam CT scanner adapted from [14]
lacking in capabilities in differentiating in soft tissue densities [13]. A illustration of
the theoretical framework of a CBCT scanner is presented on fig. 1.5.
CT images are is a representation of the X-ray images generated from the CBCT
undergone filtration which then processes sinograms into a convolution which
ends up as a greyscale image that a doctor interpret. CT generated images con-
sists of a range of Hound-field units, which is a quantitative scale that describes
radiodensity [15]. This range lies from -1000 to 1000 [HU] this scale is likewise
depicted in fig 1.6 and the principals for deriving before mentioned is described in
eq. 1.1. The window center is the midpoint of the HU that it are focusing on, and
the window width is the HU values, that the center will display in grayscale. This
visible grayscale is expressed as follows in eq. 1.3.1. Given this information, to
successfully produce a effective imaging software, there would be a implementa-
tion of filtration or manipulation of the imaged bone in order to contrast the image
in the range which the artifact has a information that it a interested in revealing.
This process and the relevance is further described in sec. 2.1.
HU = 1000 × µ −µwater
µwater −µair
(1.1)
Here, µ describes the linear attenuation coefficient, and respectively µwater and µair
corresponds to the linear annotation in water and air.
[
C −W
2 , C + W
2
]
Here, C described the window center, and W described the window with in HU.
Therefore, this can greatly impact the visibly and understanding of the image, if
the windowing is not properly calibrated, as depicted in 1.6.
1.3.2
Flying edges
Given the CT images has ben properly extrapolated into meaningful interpretation
revealing both the topology and the fractures, the next process is to digitalize the
bone model into a 3-dimensional sprite. The underlying idea is to use the digitized
artificial bone model as the base structure for the design of the personal clamp
attachment, whereby vector and plane can be inserted digitally onto the model
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
7
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.6: Houndsfields units and their relation to artifacts in the body depicted
on a relative scale, taken from [16]
Figure 1.7: This is a image of how window width and window center impacts the
resolution of a CT image from [16]
8
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:21==
Figure 1.8: Figure of the flying edges algorithm on the second iteration (black line
surrounding the dots), image adapted from [18]
to yield the best clamp attachment solution, and then 3-D print before mentioned
clamp attachment, similarly stated in 1.1. For this extrapolation, the mathematic
isocontouring algorithm named flying edges is utilized. This algorithm build on a
previous isocounturing algorithm named marching cubes, which in ’simple terms’
divides a scalar field into cubes, and each cube is evaluated based on whether the
corner voxels lie above or below a certain threshold, resulting in 1 unique config-
uration of 256 possible cases, these configurations determine how the polygonal
surface is generated within each cube to represent the isosurface (the CT images).
More detailed explanation of the MC algorithm is available in app. A.5
The Flying edges algorithm utilize this framework for isocontouring but functions
a bit different Flying edges uses edge-centric traversal scheme. As opposed to
the MC algorithm, where all 3D cells was evaluated, the flying edge algorithm
processes the volume along a single axis, and from this constructs edge lists,
these lists will track the transitions between the outside and inside of the isosurface
where the scalar values of the surface exceeds the threshold (see fig. 1.8). This
method of isosurface extraction allows for parallel execution, thereby drastically
decreasing the run time [17].
Post-processing
1.3.3
Fracture planes
For a operation to be successfully conducted, if needed, the patient will be subject
to a form of permanent fixation in order to recover in the best possible manner [19],
and in order for the orthopedic surgeon to succeed in mounting this permanent fix-
ation, there must first be a so-called reduction of the bone fragment to the healthy
bone [1] . From literature, it is apparent, that in order to successfully reduce the
bone fragment, it must be reduced perpendicular to the fracture plane as depicted
on fig. 1.9. The fracture plane is a plane is defined as orientation and shape of
the fracture in the bone, determined by direction and context of which the injury
occurred. A range of different classifications system are used by highlighed is the
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
9
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.9: Illustration of fracture plane on a transverse fracture and reduction us-
ing a standard reduction clamp (grey) and permanent fixation /(yellow), illustration
from [21].
Figure 1.10: Overview of the AO/OTA classification for fracture types, image
adapted from [22]
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen Orthopaedic Trauma Association
(AO/OTA) long-bone classification system. [20], this classification system is used
for mainly long-bone classifications (comprehensive list on fig. 1.10). However,
even used incorrect, throughtout this thesis, the fracture plane will be assessed
as the tibial platue fracture on the medial site.
1.3.4
Mechanics and friction
Here I want to tell about basic of biomechanics, principals of friction and stress and
shear. For a personalized clamp attachment to be successful, one must define
the criteria of what success can be derived from, and the underlying theory behind
the success criteria. These personalized clamp attachments will undergo perfor-
mance testing in terms of material performance, in order to assess the quality of
said clamp attachments. Therefore, the theory must be stated.
Friction is defined as the force that opposes motion between to surfaces in contact.
10
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.11: Stress-strain curve describing the basic principals off plastic and elas-
tic deformation in terms of the stress and strain exerted on a unit. Image adapted
from [23]
There is a distinguish between static and dynamic friction, where static friction is
a contact force between to objects that ensure that the objects remains static
in relation to each other. Dynamic friction on the other hand, is when the static
friction is surpassed and on or both of the objects opposes movement by each
other. Other types of friction is acknowledged however does not pose a relevance
for this thesis.
Elongation at break refers to the extent a material can stretch or deform before
fracturing, expressed as a percentage of its original length. It is a measure of
a material’s ability to undergo plastic deformation and provides insight into how
flexible or brittle a material may behave under tension. Higher elongation values
indicate more stretchable and pliable materials.
Ultimate tensile strength (UTS) is the maximum stress a material can withstand
while being stretched or pulled before breaking. Indicating of a materials resis-
tance to tensile forces measured in megapascals (MPa). Typically one would
materials with high UTS are better suited for load-bearing applications.
Flexural modulus, also known as the bending modulus, quantifies a material stiff-
ness when subjected to bending forces. It represents the ratio of stress to strain
in flexural deformation. A higher flexural modulus indicates a stiffer material and
compressive strength is the capacity of a material to withstand loads tending to
reduce size, i.e., compressive forces. It is the maximum compressive stress a ma-
terial can bear without failure and is crucial in applications where the material is
expected to resist being crushed or squashed. Material properties are highlighted
on this stress-strain curve 1.11
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
11
==PAGE:24==
Figure 1.12: Illustration of the general setup for a SLA 3D printer as described in
1.3.5, image adapted from [25]
1.3.5
Stereolithography
3D SLA (Stereolithography) printing is an additive manufacturing process that
uses a Ultra violet light source, a projector at ≈365 nm to selectively cure liquid
photo-polymer used to initiate a localized photo-polymerization. resin bath consis-
tent of ≈20% monomer ≈80% water and ≈0.5% initiator and ≈0.1% absorber.
While the monomers function as a form of building block for a polymer network,
and the photoinitiator absorb the UV light to trigger cross-linking reaction. The
absorber controls the penetration depth of the light source in the z-direction, pre-
venting over curing between layer. This results in extremely fine vertical resolution,
often as low as 25–50 µm, making SLA ideal for applications requiring high dimen-
sional accuracy and fine surface detail, such as dental models, surgical guides, or
orthopedic prototypes. However, the mechanical and biocompatibility properties
of the printed parts strongly depend on the resin composition and post-processing
steps, such as washing in isopropyl alcohol and UV post-curing. Despite these
limitations, SLA remains a widely adopted technology in the biomedical field due
to its precision, surface quality, and ability to fabricate complex geometries without
the need for tooling [24].
Several 3D printing technologies are used across for general purpose rapid proto-
typing, each method offering distinct advantages depending on the intended appli-
cation. Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) is the most widespread method due to
its low cost, simplicity, and accessibility. It extrudes thermoplastic filaments layer-
by-layer and is particularly useful for basic prototyping. However, FDM often lacks
the resolution and surface finish required for detailed medical applications [26].
PolyJet printing, which jets and instantly cures layers of photopolymer resin, al-
12
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:25==
lows for extremely fine detail and multi-material printing. It is ideal for realistic
anatomical models and complex prototypes but is associated with high equipment
and material costs. Digital Light Processing (DLP), similar to SLA, uses a projec-
tor to cure resin and can achieve high-speed, high-resolution prints. Its speed
and detail are advantageous, though it shares the same material constraints as
SLA. Among these, Stereolithography (SLA) although generally more costly than
FDM, has the ability to produce highly detailed, accurate, and biocompatible parts
makes it particularly advantageous for medical applications in regards to FDM.
Including surgical guides, dental appliances, and patient-specific orthopedic im-
plants, where geometric fidelity, smooth surfaces, and clinical reliability.
[27].
For these reasons, SLA was selected as the preferred fabrication method in this
project.
1.4
State of the art
3D pritining in orthopedic surgery has excelled in the past couple of years with
both the increase of accessibility in the technology and a increased focus on the
personalization of treatment options for patients. In a study from by Tack, et. al,
a systematic literature review was conducted in order to examine the the applica-
tions of 3D-printing applications in the medical field.[9]. From this, it was found
that the 3D-techology made its entry to the medical science no later than 10 years
ago, emphasizing that this emerge in the technology has increased rapidly in the
last decade. this is highlighted on figure 1.14. With more than 96% of the pa-
pers focusing on the elements of pre-operative planning materials elements to
some extend. Therefore it is seen as a great advantage for the surgeons in the
pre-operative phase without the need for intervention. Another study from Olin
reviewed the usage of CT derived pre-surgical guides for dentistry implants [28].
This article showcases the usage of the 3D-technology in the medical field, where
3D models can be used in order to prepare the surgeon in the best possible way,
before intervening, thereby minimizing risk for errors during or post surgery [29].
When examining the state of the art technology of reduction clamp, the current
technology relies on the form of these, for a reference image of current available
reduction clamp and the usage see fig 1.13.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
13
==PAGE:26==
Figure 1.13: Image of 3 different types of reduction clamp used for reduction
of syndermosis, a) crossing K-wire fixation, b) bone reduction forceps and c)
collinear reduction clamp, image adapted from [30]
Figure 1.14: Overview of current technological progression in the field of applied
3D printing in healthcare, image adapted from [31]
14
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:27==
2
Methods
This Chapter consists of a presentation of the methods used in order to digitalize
the specific right knee artificial bone model 1.3 used for this thesis, along with
methods used for designing the PCS printing and mechanical testing of the per-
sonal clamp attachment. The methodology follows phase one from 1.1.
2.1
Initialization of the bone model
When a patient is admitted to the hospital with a fracture, the standard clinical
procedure involves a detailed assessment of the osseous structures to determine
the most appropriate treatment strategy. In line with this clinical workflow, the
development of the patient-specific clamp system (PCS) was based on computed
tomography (CT) imaging of the right knee model stated in 1.3.3, replicating the
typical diagnostic-to-surgical pipeline. To emulate the real-life process as closely
as possible, both a model with soft tissue (skin) and one without were subjected to
CT scanning. This comparative approach aimed to evaluate which configuration
yielded the highest resolution and anatomical fidelity in the resulting STL files,
which are critical for accurate 3D reconstruction and subsequent PCS design. The
imaging data served as the foundation for segmenting the bone structures and
generating geometries compatible with 3D printing and surgical planning.
2.1.1
Digitization of bone model
The digitization process of the right knee bone model was performed using a cone
beam CT scanner, as shown in Figure 2.1. A total of three scans were conducted:
two scans of the model without artificial skin and one scan of the model with arti-
ficial skin. These were acquired at two different imaging settings:
• Scan 1: 90 kVp at 2 mA
• Scan 2: 65 kVp at 2 mA
In total, twelve CT image sets were generated. Two of these represent full volume
scans of the model without artificial skin and were used for calibration purposes—
one per scan setting.
The output from each scan was saved in raw DICOM format. To investigate a
personalized solution for the model’s fractures, custom Python scripts were devel-
oped to preprocess and visualize the CT data (see Section 1.3.1). These scripts
enabled the conversion and segmentation of the DICOM images and are available
in section A.2.
2.1.2
From CT to STL model
Following the acquisition of the CT images of the right knee model, a digital repre-
sentation of the osseous geometry was generated through surface reconstruction.
This was achieved using a custom-developed Python script that employed the fly-
ing edges algorithm (Section 1.3.2) to extract an iso-surface from the volumetric
data and subsequently export the result as a stereolithography (STL) file format.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
15
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.1: Image of the cone beam CT scanner used to capture the right knee
bone model, both with and without artificial skin. Scans were performed at Bispe-
bjerg Hospital.
The reconstructed surface mesh consisted of approximately #faces = 2.1 × 106 tri-
angular faces. The resolution and structural fidelity of this mesh are discussed
further in the Discussion chapter, where its implications for surface accuracy and
downstream CAD integration are examined. Notably, the Flying Edges algorithm
was utilized during the reconstruction process in lieu of the traditional Marching
Cubes, offering improved computational efficiency and preservation of topological
consistency. The resulting 3D surface model is visualized in Figure 2.6b, where
each black dot indicates the centroid of a triangular face within the reconstructed
mesh. To enhance anatomical fidelity and improve interpret-ability, the model was
subsequently imported into Blender, where visual smoothing techniques were ap-
plied. This yielded a more anatomically realistic rendering of the bone morphol-
ogy, as depicted in Figure2.6b.The surface reconstruction algorithm, documented
in full in Section A.2, incorporated a Gaussian filter with a standard deviation of
σ = 1 during preprocessing. This filtering step served to suppress high-frequency
image noise at the expense of slight spatial blurring, thereby reducing resolution.
Nonetheless, this trade-off was deemed acceptable, as it enhanced the robust-
ness and continuity of the segmented bone surface by attenuating minor imaging
artifacts and preserving the gross anatomical structure.
The 3D scan of the standard reduction clamp was performed inside an ATOM
ScanBox 3, utilizing a 3D scanner mounted on a robotic arm (FANUC) 3. The
scanning system 3 operated by emitting structured light at a frequency of 5–10kHz,
and the data acquisition was managed via the Zeiss software suite 3. Due to the
clamp’s reflective and metallic surface, an anti-reflective coating was applied to
ensure accurate surface capture. This process resulted in a high-fidelity surface
mesh with approximately #faces = 115 × 103 triangular faces.
16
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.2: Snapshot of the custom-built 2D DICOM viewer implemented in
Python 3, displaying the bone model with artificial skin. Hounsfield units.
Figure 2.3: Animated DICOM slice viewer implemented in Python, showing an
axial scroll-through of the scanned bone model.
With this, all core components required for digital modeling in this thesis were
successfully digitized: the bone model, reconstructed from CT imaging, and the
standard reduction clamp, obtained via 3D optical scanning. These digital assets
provided the foundational data for the subsequent design phase. In accordance
with the outlined workflow in Figure 1.1, the project proceeded to the next stage—
designing the personalized reduction clamp in collaboration with the orthopedic
surgical team.
2.2
Design of Personalized Clamp Attachment
The personalized clamp attachment was designed using the 3D modeling soft-
ware Blender 3. The digitally reconstructed right knee bone model was imported
into the software, and the first design iteration was developed based on the core
biomechanical principles outlined in Section 1.3.4.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
17
==PAGE:30==
(a) Gaussian filter setting 0 of the artificial
bone model
(b) Gaussian filter setting 2 of the artificial
bone model.
Figure 2.4: Effect of varying Gaussian filter settings applied to the bone model
after the resulting digitization described in 1.3.2.
Figure 2.5: Preliminary image generated from the flying edges algorithm de-
scribed in 1.3.2 and implemented in the scripts listed in A.2, as seen this compu-
tation of the model does not include tendons, which was subsequently included
in the figures used for the design of the clamp solution
18
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:31==
(a) Bone model reduced to a maximum of
70,000 polygons, as generated using the
algorithm described in Section A.2.
(b) Medial view of the right knee bone
model represented as a mesh using the fly-
ing edges algorithm (Section1.3.2). Black
dots represent vertices in Blender 3.
Figure 2.6: Mesh representations of the bone model using two different polygon
resolutions and generation methods.
(a) Standard clamp prior to 3D reconstruc-
tion.
(b) Digitally reconstructed clamp model in
Blender.
Figure 2.7: Comparison of the physical standard clamp (left) and its digital coun-
terpart (right) following 3D reconstruction.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
19
==PAGE:32==
Although Blender is primarily intended for modeling and rendering of 3D assets
(such as sprites), it is particularly well-suited for visualizing complex, high-resolution
polygonal models like the bone surface mesh used in this project. However, it
lacks the precise parametric modeling capabilities typical of conventional CAD
software. While the author has prior experience with Autodesk Fusion 360, mate-
rial. 3, attempts to use this software were unsuccessful due to the computational
limitations encountered when handling the large and detailed STL mesh of the
bone. As a result, despite its limitations in terms of dimensional accuracy and
constraint-based modeling, Blender was deemed the most practical and effective
tool for the design of the personalized clamp attachment.
The design procedure was defined in close consultation with an orthopedic sur-
geon and proceeded as follows:
• Identification of the primary fracture plane on the medial aspect of the distal
femur.
• Projection of the fracture plane’s normal vector ˆn into the medial fragment,
representing the desired direction of clamping force.
• Determination of the optimal clamping location on the lateral (intact) side of
the femur.
• Measurement of the angular difference between ˆn and the desired force
vector Fclamp,lateral applied from the clamp to the lateral side.
• Insertion and spatial arrangement of design geometries based on the infor-
mation derived from the preceding steps.
Throughout this process, several limitations of Blender became apparent—particularly
in the construction of geometric primitives such as planes and vectors, which are
readily available in CAD environments. To address this, a custom Python script
was implemented to define geometric planes using vertex selections directly on
the bone model mesh, as described in section 1.3.3 and detailed in appendix
A.2.4.
The optimal clamping point was ultimately determined by visual alignment: select-
ing a location on the lateral cortical surface that was both structurally sound and
oriented as parallel as possible to the medial fracture plane. With this alignment
established, the directional vectors were defined, and the personalized clamp at-
tachment was subsequently constructed based on this geometrical framework.
2.3
3D Printing
Following the completion of the digital clamp attachment model, the next step in-
volved fabrication via stereolithographic 3D printing, with the objective of enabling
mechanical validation of the physical prototypes.
In alignment with the methodology described in Section1.3.5, the printing process
was carried out using a layer resolution of 0.5mm. This configuration yielded a
total print time of approximately 7 hours for a batch of 8 units (organized as 2x4
designs). Each printed pair consisted of a medial and a lateral clamp attachment,
20
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.8: First-generation clamp attachment design based on the methodology
described, the PCS corresponds to the cylindrical structures engulfing the medial
side of the tibia fracture and the lateral side of tibia. Note: the model is mirrored,
with the medial side facing to the left in the current Blender orientation.
produced in various sizes to accommodate anatomical variability. The printing
resin used was Black Resin, material 3, selected for its favorable mechanical char-
acteristics and surface resolution. The rationale for this material choice, along with
a presentation on design features will be presented in chapter. 4.
The standardized printing and post-processing protocol consisted of the following
steps:
• Initiate the print via the PreForm software, mat.3 and send the job to the SLA
3D printer3.
• Perform initial cleaning of printed parts in a 99% isopropyl alcohol bath for
20 minutes using the Form Wash station, mat, 3.
• Manually rinse parts in isopropyl alcohol until visibly free of uncured resin.
• Post-cure the printed components for 60 minutes at 60◦C using the Form
Cure unit 3 to optimize mechanical performance.
Through this method, the final physical prototypes of the personalized clamp at-
tachments were successfully materialized and made available for subsequent me-
chanical testing, as described in the following section. Likewise will the different
design and considerations leading to the different designs be presented in further.
2.4
Mechanical testing
The mechanical testing was conducted for 3 different configurations: 1. To assess
the friction between the personal clamp attachment 2. to assess the maximum
force the clamp can subject to the bone before penetration of the bone topology
3. To test the breaking load. As these parameters widely was dependent on the
design process, there was a wide variety different results for the different iterations
of designs. These mechanical tests was conduced on a universal testing machine
mat. 3 and the model can be seen in A.1
For the first mechanical experiment, the static friction generated by both the per-
sonalized clamp attachment and the standard reduction clamp was evaluated.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
21
==PAGE:34==
(a) Formlabs generation 3
(mat.
3, SLA 3D printer
used for fabricating clamp
prototypes.
(b) Washing station (mat.
3 for removing residual
resin using 99%-isopropyl
alcohol by submerging the
3D-prints for a duration of
20 min into this bath.
(c) Curing station to final-
ize polymerization for sec-
tions of the prints available
post cleaning process.
Figure 2.9: Laboratory equipment used during the SLA printing workflow.
Each clamp was placed in direct contact with the artificial bone surface, and the
total static friction force arising from the interaction between the clamp and the
underlying metal platform was measured using a dynamometer. A schematic il-
lustration of the experimental setup is provided on fig. 2.10.
To simulate realistic fixation conditions, an initial pre-load of approximately ≈20
[N] was applied to secure the clamps in position. Both the standard and person-
alized clamps were aligned at the midpoint of the medial surface of the tibia, with
the inferior articular surface oriented towards the dynamometer. This ensured
consistent and comparable contact areas for both test configurations. In the sec-
ond mechanical experiment, a series of compression tests were conducted on
both clamp types. The contact interface for each test was again the midpoint of
the medial surface, this time on the fibula. During testing, a mechanical testing
machine displaced each clamp vertically into the bone model at a constant rate of
1
[mm
s
]
, while continuously recording the applied force. The tests proceeded until
permanent deformation of the bone was observed, indicated by visible indentation
or damage to the surface. A schematic overview of this compression test setup is
shown in Figure2.11. A third mechanical experiment was a series of compressive
tests was performed on the clamp attachments with the objective of fracture of the
material, the experiment was conducted in such a manner, that a loading platform
would displace itself with a step size of 1
[mm
s
]
and would end at material fracture.
Schematics of the experimental setup is presented on fig. 2.12
22
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.10: Schematics of the mechanical first mechanical test described, a test
of the friction between the PCA and the artificial bone given a applied force in the
x-direction, both the clamp and the clamp attachment was tested in this setup.
The relevant forces applied on the system is depicted on this force diagram.
Figure 2.11: mechanical testing part II, mechanical compression test of PCA so-
lution. The PCA was mounted and displaced in the negative y-direction (into the
artificial bone), the forces exerted on the PCA is depicted on this illustration.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
23
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.12: Illustation of the third mechanical test conducted for this study, a
compression until fracture test of the PCA. The PCA was fixated and displaced
into the fixation platform until total fracture and the maximal compressive force of
the PCA was determined.
24
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:37==
3
Materials
CT Scanner Carestream OnSight 3D Extremity System (2016 model)
Bone Model Synbone Knee right fractured w/ PCL
Python Version Python 3.13.3
Blender Version Blender 4.3
PreForm PreForm v.1018®
ScanBox ATON ScanBox
FANUC Robot FANUC LR Mate 200iD/7L
GOM Scanner GOM ATOS Core 200
Zeiss Software Zeiss v2025.2.0.1322
Fusion 360 Autodesk Fusion 360 (2025 Student Edition)
3D Printer Formlabs Form 3
Form Cure Form Cure (Generation 1)
Form Wash Form Wash (Generation 1)
Resin Formlabs Black Resin 4.1
Testing Machine Hegewald Peschke 50 kN
Testing Software LabMaster
Caliper Boxer 31811 Caliper
Clamp Braun AESCULAP Reposition Forceps, curved, 200 mm
Visual Toolkit Python Visualization toolkit 9.5.0
OpenAI
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
25
==PAGE:38==
26
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:39==
4
Results and design
considerations
This Chapter will present the different clamp designs and the considerations for
each design iteration, along with the results obtianed from mechanical tests con-
ducted on selected ideal candidates of said PCA.
4.1
Digitization pipeline
Although a successful interface for the process of visualizing the DICOM and
interpretation of a virtual model of the right knee model was conducted, due to
the limiting factor of using only a single method of rebuilding of the digital model,
no meaningful quantification could be presented, although it would have made
great sense to test the results of the flying edges algorithm. Given previous re-
search it would have been optimal to test the algorithm to compare the Haus-
dorff distance (the degree of mismatch between two sets) and the face triangle
quality, as these are measures of the resolution of the virtual model. Although
these would have been great measures, obtaining such measurements lies be-
yond the capabilities of this thesis, therefore, the only measure obtained from
this phase is the run-time of the script, first as the first iteration of the digitization
had a run-time of tcomptuting,iteration,1 ≈8000 s (2.2 h) and the last iteration was
tcomputing,interation,last ≈135 s (2.5 min.). This first iteration thereby yielded a per-
formance heavy and long process when using the Marching cubes algorithm, and
using the flying edges algorithm, there was a significant decrease in the run-time
without a huge loss in quality and the theory behind the flying edges algorithm is
described in sec 1.8, this decrease in run-time likewise meant for the possibility for
more iteration in a shorter time-span, and thereby the selection of the best digital
bone model could be selected.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
27
==PAGE:40==
4.2
3D printing and design results
Given the digitization was conducted, the 3D-printed PCA was designed in compli-
ance with orthopedic surgeons, meaning, that in order to make a successful print,
the following constrains listed below was taken into design consideration, while
ultimately ensuring that the mechanical stability and functioning was upheld.
• The size of the PCS would be no larger than 5 cm in diameter in order to
comply with surgical procedure of a TKA [32].
• The PSC would fit to one exact point of contact, yielding a force of reduction
exactly perpendicular to the fracture plane.
• The PCS would follow the topology of the the artificial bone such that no
other configuration would a function, without interfering with apparatuses
used for permanent fixation [21]
• The personalized clamp attachment (PCA) demonstrated a compressive
strength exceeding the maximum force typically applied manually by the
surgeon
Given the reduction in orthopedic terminology is a intermediary step before per-
manent fixation of screws and platelets, the limiting factor on the design was size,
as the median insertions size for minimal invasive total knee arthroplasty is ≈
10 cm Therefore goal was to minimize the 3D-printed solution, while keeping the
design features and maximizing the mechanical stability. This resulted in a total
of 32 prints (one was destroyed during the mechanical testing) was conducted
throughout this thesis, this resulted in 5 different iterations of PCS where major
changes was conducted on the design visible on fig 4.2. This likewise means that
in a single iteration there was a range of parameters that differed for the designs
for example the number of spikes would alter in a iteration but the overall form
of the personalized clamp design was held constant at a design. This however
differ in the 4th iteration, where a rotative solution was substituted for a static de-
sign see fig. 4.1, although both a static and a rotative design was printed in this
generation. The thoughts on this design was an attempt to solve the problem of
the constraint of the clamp solution only working on a single point, by designing
a unit that given rotation more easily could achieve a configuration where this ex-
act contact point would be obtained. However, it was found that this idea was
too difficult to implement with the given design, given that the spikes on the PCA
was too small to penetrate and stick to the artificial bone surface, therefore, the
following design, there has a shift in focus back to a static PCA, which, through
testing would show more promising results in terms of the friction generated from
the PCA on the bone surface.
28
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:41==
(a) Rotating head design iteration in section
view, showcasing internal mechanics.
(b) Blender X-ray view of the PCA design
version 4 with rotatable head revealing the
internal structure.
Figure 4.1: PCA design iteration 4 with rotating head concept. (a) Sectional view
of the encasing and rotating mechanism. (b) CAD visualization in Blender.
Figure 4.2: This is a overview of all of the prints, the requirements and experiments
conducted throughout this thesis yielded a total of 32 prints (31 visible in the image)
for 5 different iterations atoned by a red box on the image
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
29
==PAGE:42==
Design generation
Optimized feature
Dimensions (W & H) [mm]
1
Exact fit to bone topology
29.25, 10.15 ± 0.03
2
Size
5.08, 4.00 ± 0.03
3
Exact fit to clamp point
16.57, 30.00 ± 0.03
4
Exact fit to clamp point & addressing of friction
8.87, 16.79 ± 0.03
5
Addressing of friction
11.68, 9.83 ± 0.03
Table 4.1: Overview of the five generations of the personalized clamp attachment,
describing the key optimized features and dimensional changes from one iteration
to the next.
(a) 01
(b) 02
(c) 03
(d) 04
(e) 05-I
(f) 05-II
Figure 4.3: Printed 3D reduction clamp attachments for each iteration at the set
at the appropriate reduction site on the artificial bone found through blender. This
similarly resembles the preliminary experiment conducted on all types of prints to
determine the functionality.
The considerations of the first design was a larger surface area would yield a more
accessible reduction point. This however would prove rather unsuccessful, as the
force generated by the clamp was far greater than the friction force generated by
the clamp attachment onto the artificial bone surface. 4.3, however it was found
through preliminary experiments, that it was a challenge to fit the PCA to both the
clamp and the bone, and even more difficult to secure the clamp on the lateral
side meanwhile keeping the PCA at the optimal clamping spot.
All of the designs was subject to a preliminary experiment before they were as-
sessed for subject of mechanical testing. The clamps was mounted on the ap-
propriate clamping side and then fitted to the fragment on the medial side and
then anchored on the lateral side. From here, the clamp was compressed until
the PCA would either fixate the fragment, or for 4 of the cases, the force applied
by the clamp onto the clamp attachment would pull the fragment towards resting
of the clamp, (see figure 4.2). It was simply found from these preliminary that the
first iteration and second iteration could by no means clamp perpendicular to the
fracture plane due to poor fixation to the bone surface leading to slippage rather
than secure fragment reduction.
This was solved in two different manners one was attempted in design iteration 3,
where a design was tested for implementation embedding the digitalized clamp
into the PCA, thereby creating a form that would fit the clamp. This proved some-
what successful, as it was found that the standard clamp could be constrained to
a single configuration by the 3D-printed material. However, this design was highly
30
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:43==
impractical in application, as this left no room for error, as the PCA design was
fitted a single point of contact in blender, and therefore it was found to impractical
for further development.
Therefore, given the information revealed above, a range of different design was
developed using the information above and in audience with a orthopedic surgeon.
The design shifted from focusing on a patient specific model, to a model that would
have 3 equal contact points on artificial bone surface and using the discovery
above, designed to engulf and suspend the clamp surface to a single configuration,
however given the shift on the clamping side the PCA, this would allow for rotation
of clamp around its own axis. One major flaw of this design was the the rotation of
the clamp attachment in relation to the artificial bone surface, as when a increase
in force exerted through the standard clamp would decrease the internal angle of
apparatus changing the angle of contact between the PCS and the artificial bone
surface. This was somewhat mitigated through design iteration 4 and 5, where a
more general design was implemented, however this problem was ultimately not
solved to a satisfying degree.
4.2.1
Estimation of forces
Given the print, a sensible measure in the scope of this thesis, although not thor-
oughly tested would be a estimation of the force (note which force it is) which
theoretically the PCS can maximally withstand, from the article [33] the mean
hand grip strength for a male surgeon at age 49 is 39.0 ± 11.1 [kg], therefore the
mean force of the grip strength is 481.18 ±109.002 [N]. Given these estimation the
hand strength and using the lever principal, the force required by the clamp can
be estimated.
noted that these estimation does not consider the form of the Personal clamp,
which greatly influence the stress dissipation though the material and the friction
the design can generate.
M1 = M2
(4.1)
Given eq 4.1 the following expression would describe the lever principal for the
forces acting on the clamp from the hand.
Fclamp = Lhand
Lclamp
· Fhand
(4.2)
using the eq. 4.2 a estimation of the force delivered of the clamp onto the PCA
can be computed, this can be used to make estimation of the force exerted onto
the clamp attachment. inserting the dimensions from the clamp
the resulting Force exhibited from the hand to the clamp is then estimated to be
Fclamp,attachment = 291.82 [N]. This estimation was used to evaluate whether it was
mechanically feasible for the PCA to withstand the applied force without failing or
undergoing significant deformation during fixation.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
31
==PAGE:44==
Experiment
f max
s
[N]
1 PCA (large spikes)
15 ± 0.05
2 PCA (small spikes)
12.5 ± 0.05
3 Standard clamp
35 ± 0.05
4 PCA (large spikes)
15 ± 0.05
Table 4.2: Table of the results of measure maximum static friction f max
s
[N] for 3
different configurations of the PCA and one test for a standard clamp, mat. 3
4.3
Mechanical tests
The mechanical tests described in sec. 2.4 three different tests was conducted on
both the standard clamp mat. 3 and the last two iterations of the PCA, as these
designs was deemed eligible for mechanical testing. The first test was conducted
on 4 different elements, 3 different PCA, (all three of the PCA was 5. Gen respec-
tively with large (depicted on fig. 4.2) and the PCA with small spikes. Results of
these friction tests are listed on tab. 4.2. It should be noted that experiment 1 and
4 is a replicated experiment of the same PCA. Most apparent results from these
tests reveals that the standard clamp is capable of generating twice large static
friction as opposed to the PCA, this is in large due to the geometric difference
between the two clamps. The second mechanical test (described in 2.4 would
yield one single result, depicted on fig. 4.7. The reasoning behind this test was
to assess the mechanical stability of the spikes on the PCA, and using the design
of the small spikes, it was apparent that the material was able to penetrate the
artificial bone surface at a force of 600 [N], it should be noted that the experiment
was terminated immediately after the indentation was noticed, in order not to dam-
age the artificial bone further. As previously stated, the estimated force expected
to be delivered on the PCA from a surgeon was estimated to be ≈300 [N], and
from this test, it seems a design was achieved for handling such forces. For the
last mechanical test conducted, there was conducted a compression until fracture
of the PCA. The experimental setup was conducted as described in sec. 2.4 for
3 different clamp designs, 1 for the 4. generation and 2 from the 5. generation,
one with large spikes, and one with small spikes. The results of these tests is
listed on figures 4.5 and 4.5. Given the two tests, it is apparent that gen. 5 is a
more robust design, this is partly due to two main factors, first, the Generation 4
PCA was designed to follow the curve of the standard clamp for 6 mm to ensure
that that the clamp attachment would fit the standard clamp, however, the wall in-
tegrity was compromised in blender, as the resulting curve was composed of two
different walls. This design flaw in the walls would lead to a membrane layer of
uncured resin between the outer and the inner layer yielding a maximum compres-
sive strength of 175 [N]. This would drastically decrease the compressive strength
of the PCA of only apparent from the difference from the 3 different tests seen
on figures 4.5 and 4.6, from generation 4 to generation 5, with optimization on
the design features, the maximum compressive force would be ≈10 times higher
from a maximum of 175 ± 0.005 N to maximum of F max = 1850 ± 0.01 N.
32
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:45==
(a) Clamp friction
(b) PCS friction (Bone 2)
Figure 4.4: Comparison of the experimental setup for determinations of the static
friction between clamp and PCS friction
Figure 4.5: Graph of the force [N] as a function of time [s] for the PCA generation
5 compressed against the artificial bone surface.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
33
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: Compressive test of the maximum compressive force [N] as a function
of time [s] exerted on the PCA gen. 4 until fracture of the model.
Figure 4.7: Compressive test, force [N] as a function of time [s] of the maximum
compressive force until failure of PCA gen. 5 (small spikes) until fracture.
34
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.8: Image of the compressive test of the PCA gen. 5 (small spikes) 4.7 at
t=4 s, here can be seen visible indents in the bone topology
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
35
==PAGE:48==
36
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:49==
4.4
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results presented throughout this thesis, along with
limitations to the setup, the challenges that arose during the thesis and require-
ments for further development of this attachments along with the further scope of
the technology and a conclusion of the thesis on the entirety.
4.5
Designing and material choice
As stated previously throughout this thesis, a range of challenges arose in the
design of this personal clamp attachment, and the major challenge yet to be fixed
was the problem regarding the friction of the attachment to the bone. This problem
was through 5 different iterations not solved to a satisfying degree, this likewise
meant the project objective from 1.4.
Given the presentation of the of results in the previous section, it is apparent that
a successful formula for creating a personalized clamp attachment for orthopedic
surgeon during the reduction phase ultimately was not achieved, therefore the
achievements listed on fig.1.1 was ultimately not achieved, however, the project
achievements in phase one presented on fig. 1.4 was achieved. This section will
in part explain the underlying success and possible improvements for this study
and similarly explain the wrongdoings along the way.
Given the first criteria, it should be clear that the attachment never reached the
hands of a surgeon. Early in the process of this study, a range of different ex-
periments was planned for assessing not only the mechanical but similarly the
impact on surgeries, given that the surgeries would have been peformed on the
artificial bone model with soft tissue, mat. 3, performed by at least 6 different
doctors to statistically significance. Ideally this would have been performed by at
least 20 different doctors, for the central limit theorem to be applicable, given that
the reduction time would have been assets during these experiments. For the
qualitative experiments, a survey would have been conducted in order to assess
whether this PCA would have been an improvement for the orthopedic surgeons.
However, all of the above is merely speculations, as the project never truly achieved
to solve the underlying mechanical problems. As described in sec. F4.2 the re-
sulting 3D prints went through a number of iterations all of which gave rise to new
problems. However the largest problem, partly not solved, was that of the friction
generated between the PCA and the artificial bone. From the results presented on
table 4.2, it is clear that the material choice of the PCA, mat. 3, it was ultimately to
rigid and stiff given the designs completed had too margin of error for mounting on
the appropriate side. In simple terms, it was found almost impossible, due to the
rigid structure of the material to mount the clamp attachment correct in relation to
the optimal clamping point on the lateral side, while simultaneously reducing the
fracture correct in relation to the fracture plane. The difference between a suitable
location, and the clamping side was digitally computed to be 31 ◦, this difference
is digitally constructed on fig. 4.9.
To mitigate the problem of the angular difference between the fracture the major
change in design was the implementation of spikes on the surface of the PCA
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
37
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.9: Overview of vectors (black) resembling the direction of interests, seen
on the image is the optimal clamping side for both the lateral and medical side, a
arbitrary normal vector of the fracture plane, and a vector representing the PCA
clamping direction. Due to a angular difference of 31 ◦
as described in the previous section 4.2. As described the general idea of these
spikes was to mimic the design of the standard clamp and have a sharp egde,
however, it was the thesis, that given three sharp spikes, the clamp attachment
could at all times be in contact with the bone surface. Through the experiments,
there was found indications that such configuration of spikes or ends on the PCA
could theoretically withstand a compressive force large enough to penetrate the
bone. That is, given a range of constrains. This sole experiment proving the
concept of a functioning PCA underlines a range of problems for the validity of
this study. First if which should be addressed namely the experimental results,
and the reproducibility of these experiments.
4.5.1
Experimental results
Given very small experimental test size, and the lack of repetition of the experi-
ments, the conclusion of these experiments must be drawn with great care, sta-
tistically there is no real value of there experiments conducted, these results are
presented merely to present the finding, but holds no meaningful value in terms
of the validation of the design. This however is explained by one factor in large.
Working with the type of material presented in mat.3 and sec. 2.3, it was found
that said PCA during testing was subject to plastic deformation, and a single test
would make irreversible damage to the unit. This alone did not pose a immedi-
ate problem, as the clamp would be, ideally, a personalized solution, therefore
would be designed for every patient, and would in that regard be single use as
intended, however, this plastic deformation would for these - in vitro experiments
pose the challenge of deforming into the artificial bone. This yields another range
of consideration that would have to be considered for a final product.
4.5.2
Biocompatability
Based on the material choice, as described earlier, was limited to the Formlabs
black (listed in mat. 3) - in part due to the lack of resources, however likewise
38
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:51==
could the cytotoxicity have posed a great challenge for the further development for
this application. This particular choice of material was deemed eligible due to the
availability of it both in terms of price and scalability, however, this material would
only be eligible for the the prototype phase, as the material is not bio-compatible.
Given the designs would follow the design and manufacturing process presented
in this thesis, a more suitable material choice, would be the Formlabs Biomed Am-
ber resin (technical documentation available in appendix. A.6). This type of resin
poses superior mechanical properties in relation to this application (comparison
available at tab. 4.3)
Property
Black Resin v4.1 (Post-Cured)
BioMed Amber Resin (Post-Cured)
Ultimate Tensile Strength
48 MPa
73 MPa
Tensile Modulus / Young’s Modulus
2081 MPa
2900 MPa
Elongation at Break
12%
10%
Flexural Strength
89 MPa
103 MPa
Flexural Modulus
2260 MPa
2500 MPa
Table 4.3: Post-cured material properties of interest for the PCA device, both for
Formlabs Black Resin v4.1 and BioMed Amber Resin. Data obtained from [34]
However, the major difference between the two materials is the biocompatibility.
Biomed amber resin is available for sterilization, and at the same time outper-
forming the black resin on the material properties, therefore it is seen as a ideal
candidate for material choice, should this thesis in any way be developed further.
However, as found through the experiments, if one were to further develop upon
this idea, on might consider a different solution to the problem of ”misalignment”
of the PCA and the clamping side.
4.5.3
Coating
A rather different approach that could be explored, would be that of a supplemen-
tary material for coating on the PCA on the bone contact side. This would mitigate
the need for spikes/studs on the PCA, if a material was found that could gener-
ate the friction needed to reduce or eliminate the need for the PCA to penetrate
the bone surface. This would likewise eliminate - or drastically decrease the cy-
totoxicity of the material, as there is no direct contact to the bone, and therefore
decrease the requirements for a tough, durable and biocomplatible material. A
ideal candidate is medical-grade silicone rubber [35]. This material could be a
ideal candidate, as it is highly flexible [36] and has the ability to generate large
friction given that it is utilized in form that would support this[37]. It would have
been interesting to investigate such a possibility, however, due to a shortcoming
this was not further explored.
When assessing possible material choices and the consequences of different ma-
terial choice, it is apparent to the reader, and to the author of this thesis, that these
problems highlighted of friction and insufficient material strength could in some
form have been estimated before printing and testing. This estimation could have
been done by simulations.
4.5.4
Simulations
Early in the process of this thesis, it was discussed and strategized whether to
implement some form of either fully or partly simulation of PCA behavior, in or-
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
39
==PAGE:52==
der to assess the mechanical behavior (preferable those described in sec. 1.3.4)
of the PCA in a finite element model. However, it was rapidly realized when the
digitization process was conducted, that any form of simulation would prove to in-
efficient and would be rather time-consuming due to the nature of the digitization
of the bone model. It could - in hindsight have been advantageous to perhaps
examined the possibility of a smaller scale simulation in a simplified model, per-
haps to have predicted the major concerns addressed by this thesis. Mainly those
relating to force exerted through the PCA, as this could have given indications of
design features perhaps sooner than they were discovered. It would likewise have
been interesting to have simulations on the stress distribution through the mate-
rial, as this could have given rise to design optimization without altering through
numerous design iterations. All this is stated as a wish-full thinking, that though
simulations, a great deal of the problems could have and would have been mit-
igated prior to printing, but instead, this thesis, given the little expertise on the
subject on FEM simulation, chose ultimately not to setup such system, as it was
deemed to time-consuming for the output, rather focusing for a more ”hands-on”
approach to print and test and iterate, all in line with the scope of the goals setup
for this thesis.
4.6
Digitalization
As stated in the section just above, it was concluded that simulations was not
feasible for implementation given the resources available, mainly due to the com-
plexity such FEM model was going to abide by however, it was likewise apparent
that the chosen method for digitization of the bone model would prove difficult
for extracting to a finite element model. The usage of Flying edges was deemed
the most suitable obtaining the results needed for this thesis, the topology of the
bone surface, this method of extraction however posed issues for other attempted
features for the digitization. It was clear that the bone model of a high resolution
for it to function in the CAD program Fusion 360 (listed in mat. 3), and due to
the authors previous knowledge in this problem, it was deemed favorable to work
in this program, due to the accessibility of high-precision computer assisted draw-
ing. However, as stated in 4 the model was simply incompatible with this software,
therefore two possibilities was pursued in order to fix this problem. It was the the-
sis, that either the model should be rescaled or re-”meshed” in order to decrease
the processing of the model, this was achieved (downscale model can be seen
on fig. 2.6a) however this would prove ineffective, as the model resolution no
longer would follow the bone topology to a degree in which a PCA would follow
any meaningful contour of the actual ’bone’. Therefore another solution was at-
tempted implemented.
4.6.1
Segmentation
As stated previously, it was a assumption that a form of segmentation was of ad-
vantage, as this could decrease the processing needed to render and manipulate
the bone model in any design program. Therefore, it was attempted to implement
a segmentation based on the Watershed algorithm (full python script available in
appendix A.2.6) and the resulting segmentation is presented on fig. 4.10, from
this figure, is is clear that the iteration presented on the image had a far more
40
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.10: Attempted implementation of watershed algorithm, for this iteration
there is a far to great segmentation, and large parts due to overshoot of edges
has been falsely misclassified as empty, therefore the model appears hollow at
places.
strict segmentation, although still incorrect due to too strict filtering of ”holes” in
the model, this is explained by the bone fragments not being in contact with tibia,
therefore the algorithm misclassified these as edges and would filter these away,
this similarly explains why patella is visible, as it is (not apparend from the figure)
on the CT images in contact with the femur bone, and therefore is fully visible on
the image generated as a result of segmentation. Although not presented in en-
tirety this algorithm was tested and tweaked on numerous occasions but ultimately
scrapped due to the sheer amount of time used on debugging and optimization
leading to no progression, therefore it was decided that a shift in focus towards
utilizing the high-resolution model would be the best outcome given the situation.
This leading to the next step in the process.
4.6.2
Choosing Between CAD and Blender for Orthopedic
Design
Stated above, the utilization of a high resolution model proved impossible to han-
dle in the CAD software fusion 360, therefore a change to the sketching software
Blender was utilized, given no prior experience in the workflow of blender the ge-
ometries of the PCA was limited to simple and easily available geometries, how-
ever the software was ultimately chosen over other CAD software due to com-
patibility with Python, whereby scripts could automate part of the design process
to both increase the automation and optimization of design features. The differ-
ent feature from a 3-D modeling program, and a CAD program is, however, the
premise of the entire precision of the drawing. As stated, there was no prior expe-
rience of workflow and design management in the blender software, and this like-
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
41
==PAGE:54==
wise meant that the simple task of drawing with precision posed a great challenge,
as there was no native feature for vectors and arrows in blender, therefore, every
design for every iteration of the PCA would be assesses by to an extend freehand
and the limiting constrains presented natively by the Blender software, functions
such as fix rotation to point, and constrain location on axis was all workarounds
to achieve a appropriate solution. Also mentioning the dimensioning of the model,
given the large amount of prints conducted, all of which differs in size (as pre-
sented on tab. 4.1) the sizing of the models was a hurdle. The was for the entirety
of this project not found any meaningful way to determine the sizes of the appara-
tuses designed through blender, as the sizing of the model could not be handled
at real scale. The Blender software - in experience of the author, unable to rescale
the artificial bone model to the correct size, therefore the model appeared in the
software at scale 0.1 of the original size with the dimensions of 2.2 [m] in length
and 0.6 [m] in width. This meant for all iterations of the print, the PCA would un-
dergo rescaling in the Preform software. However when the PCA was converted
from Blender to Preform, they would rescale from appropriate scale, to a arbi-
traty 0.00029 × 0.00010 [mm], before rescaling was required in Preform. The use
of blender presented more difficulty than first appropriated, some problems was
solved, or in parts solved along the way, however, a there still lies a steep learn-
ing curve for utilizing this program to the maximum by the author of this thesis. If
given the opportunity to revisit this problem again, perhaps another approach than
using the Blender software would be more appropriate in order to design and fab-
ricate more precise models. Especially when highlighting the problems that arose
stated previously.
4.6.3
Flying edges algorithm
perhaps, if given more time, and with the experience gained from the works on this
thesis, it would have been interesting to utilize a different approach to the digitiza-
tion of the bone model, as the model quality was indeed very detailed as a result
of using the isocontouring algorithm flying edges, however this algorithm, like per-
haps any other isocontouring algorithm likewise presented itself with issues. As
flying edges compared to marching cubes, the foundational isocontouring rebuild-
ing algorithm as described more detailed in sec. 1.3.2 was the fastest algorithm
and deemed more suitable for this project, the most apparent downside of using
this algorithm however, as experienced the formation of ’holes’ or impurities pre-
sented on the surface, as can be seen on fig. 4.11, this might be explained as
a result from floating-point errors, or edge evaluation inconsistencies due to the
parallel processing framework.
4.7
Conclusion
It would be easy without any doubt, to state that the work of this thesis ultimately
did not present a solution to the problem presented for this thesis. That however
would also be a wrong assessment, although, underlining the numerous problems
that was found, solved and found again, the lack of experimental data, the large
amount of unsuccessful prototypes and the lack of experimental repetition to val-
idate the slim success of a single PCA unit, the overall achievement of reducing
orthopedic surgeons time-of-reduction and increase the reduction stability was
42
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.11: Image of the medial side of the right knee model converted to a mesh
structure using flying edges algorithm described in 1.3.2, the hole on the surface
is a direct result of the usage of the algorithm flying edges.
never truly tested. However, presented through this entire thesis, is the work and
attempted work of features, some - more ambitious of others - that was in part
implemented in order to digitalize, design, print and test. Therefore, the founda-
tion for further investigation is build, for further exploration and testing of material
choice, coating, optimization and automation. Therefore, the success of this study
rests not in the results alone, but on the entire method of obtaining these results.
4.8
Outlook
As stated previously in this chapter, there could potentially be a wide range of
avenues for future development and refinement of the concepts introduced in this
thesis. Although a fully functional and clinically tested personalized clamp attach-
ment (PCA) was not achieved within the scope of this study, the work presented
has laid a clear foundation for future innovation in this space.
One of the most immediate next steps would be a continued focus on material se-
lection. While Formlabs Black Resin v4.1 served its role as a prototyping medium,
the use of bio-compatible, sterilizable materials such as BioMed Amber should
be further explored, especially in relation to their mechanical behavior in contact
with both artificial and real bone surface. Additionally, the concept of applying a
soft, high-friction coating to the contact surface—such as medical-grade silicone—
warrants experimental testing. This could potentially resolve many of the mechan-
ical and cytotoxic limitations encountered in this project.
Similarly, design optimization through simulation, particularly using FEM could
prove a key role in excelling in understanding a prototyping new iterations. The
next major milestone for this PCA application would be qualitative assessments by
orthopedic surgeons. This would allow not only for validation of performance met-
rics such as mechanical assessment but also for feedback on usability, surgical
relevance, and overall clinical value.
Lastly, the automation and personalization pipeline could be vastly improved. Python
based scripting in Blender or external processing environments can be used to
generate PCA designs directly from patient CT data, allowing for automated work-
flows that reduce manual modeling time and standardize the generation of per-
sonalized devices.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
43
==PAGE:56==
In summary, while this thesis does not present a final clinical solution, it opens
multiple promising pathways for future exploration. With improved materials, sim-
ulation, segmentation, and automation, the personalized clamp attachment has
the potential to become a viable tool for improving the reduction phase of orthope-
dic surgery—one that combines precision, speed, and personalization in a cost-
effective, low-maintenance solution.
44
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Unaivable. Basics of orthopedics. URL: https://medictests.com/units/basics-
of-orthopedic-trauma. (accessed: 07.06.2025).
[2]
R. Han et al. “Fracture reduction planning and guidance in orthopaedic
trauma surgery via multi-body image registration”. eng. In: Medical Image
Analysis 68 (2021), p. 101917. ISSN: 13618415, 13618423. DOI: 10.1016/
j.media.2020.101917.
[3]
Zeyu Huang et al. “Meta-analysis of temporary versus no clamping in TKA”.
eng. In: Orthopedics 36.7 (2013), pp. 543–550. ISSN: 19382367, 01477447.
DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20130624-11.
[4]
Zhuoxin Fu et al. “Indirect visual guided fracture reduction robot based on ex-
ternal markers”. eng. In: International Journal of Medical Robotics and Com-
puter Assisted Surgery 17.1 (2021), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 1478596x, 14785951.
DOI: 10.1002/rcs.2162.
[5]
Giles R. Scuderi. Current advances in total knee arthroplasty. eng. Future
Medicine Ltd., 2014, pp. 1–113. ISBN: 1780844980, 1780844999, 1780845006,
9781780844985, 9781780844992, 9781780845005. DOI: 10.2217/9781780844985.
[6]
Jiayao Zhang and Zhewei Ye. “Digital orthopedics: the third technological
wave of orthopedics”. In: Intelligent Medicine 5.2 (2025), pp. 91–94. ISSN:
2667-1026. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imed.2024.09.003. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2667102624000652.
[7]
Kun Ling, Wenzhu Wang, and Jie Liu. “Current developments in 3D print-
ing technology for orthopedic trauma A review”. eng. In: Medicine (united
States) 104.12 (2025), e41946. ISSN: 15365964, 00257974. DOI: 10.1097/
MD.0000000000041946.
[8]
Hitesh Lal and Mohit Kumar Patralekh. “3D printing and its applications
in orthopaedic trauma: A technological marvel”. eng. In: Journal of Clini-
cal Orthopaedics and Trauma 9.3 (2018), pp. 260–268. ISSN: 22133445,
09765662. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcot.2018.07.022.
[9]
Philip Tack et al. “3D-printing techniques in a medical setting: A system-
atic literature review”. eng. In: Biomedical Engineering Online 15.1 (2016),
p. 115. ISSN: 1475925x. DOI: 10.1186/s12938-016-0236-4.
[10]
Unaivable. Knee right w/ fractured tibia w/ MCL , LCL , PCL, patella a/ soft
tissue. URL: https://www.synbone.com/product/iff-034010/?shop_currency=
CHF. (accessed: 12.06.2025).
[11]
Madalena Antunes et al. “A novel 3D-printed clamping interface for the ten-
sile testing of biological specimens”. eng. In: Journal of Biomechanics 179
(2025), p. 112457. ISSN: 18732380, 00219290. DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.
2024.112457.
[12]
Shady Hermena and Michael Young. “CT-scan image production procedures”.
In: StatPearls (2023).
[13]
Samuel J. Zeichner. “Cone beam CT”. eng. In: Digital Technologies in Cran-
iomaxillofacial Surgery (2018). Ed. by Alex M. Greenberg, pp. 47–53. DOI:
10.1007/978-1-4939-1532-3_3.
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
45
==PAGE:58==
[14]
Unaivable. CBCT overview. URL: https://journal.parker.edu/article/78105-
cone - beam - computed - tomography - technology - overview - dose - and - utility -
considerations-for-chiropractors-and-regulatory-bodies. (accessed: 02.07.2025).
[15]
Michael Anthony Hurrell et al. “Spectral Hounsfield units: a new radiological
concept”. In: European radiology 22.5 (2012), pp. 1008–1013.
[16]
Unaivable. A matter of grayscale. URL: https://asvcode.github.io/MedicalImaging/
medical_imaging/windowing/dicoms/2020/11/04/A- Matter- Of- Grayscale-
Understanding-Dicom-Windows.html. (accessed: 09.07.2025).
[17]
William Schroeder, Rob Maynard, and Berk Geveci. “Flying edges: A high-
performance scalable isocontouring algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Large Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV). Ed. by J. Ben-
nett, H. Childs, and M. Hadwiger. IEEE, 2015, pp. 33–40. ISBN: 9781467385176.
DOI: 10.1109/LDAV.2015.7348069.
[18]
William Schroeder, Rob Maynard, and Berk Geveci. “Flying edges: A high-
performance scalable isocontouring algorithm”. In: 2015 IEEE 5th sympo-
sium on large data analysis and visualization (ldav). IEEE. 2015, pp. 33–
40.
[19]
Michael J Beltran, Joshua L Gary, and Cory A Collinge. “Management of dis-
tal femur fractures with modern plates and nails: state of the art”. In: Journal
of orthopaedic trauma 29.4 (2015), pp. 165–172.
[20]
Rasmus Stokholm et al. “Accuracy and reliability of the AO/OTA classifica-
tion for tibial shaft fractures”. eng. In: Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and
Trauma 59 (2024), p. 102826. ISSN: 22133445, 09765662. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jcot.2024.102826.
[21]
Unaivable. AO planning. URL: https://surgeryreference.aofoundation.org/
orthopedic-trauma/adult-trauma/basic-technique/basic-principles-of-plating#
introduction. (accessed: 24.07.2025).
[22]
AO Foundation. The AO/OTA classification consists of three types, nine
groups, and 27 subgroups. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-
AO-OTA-classification-consists-of-three-types-nine-groups-and-27-subgroups_
fig1_262803599. (accessed: 24.07.2025).
[23]
AHSS Insights. Stress–Strain Curve for AHSS. https://ahssinsights.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/2.1.5-Fig1-Stress-strainCurve.svg. Accessed July 27,
2025. 2021.
[24]
Atul Babbar et al. “Functionalized biomaterials for 3D printing: An overview
of the literature”. eng. In: Additive Manufacturing With Functionalized Nano-
materials (2021), pp. 87–107. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-823152-4.00005-3.
[25]
Nexa3D. 3D Printer Resins: Types, Applications, and Properties. https://
nexa3d.com/blog/3d-printer-resins/. Accessed: 2025-07-25. 2024.
[26]
I. John Solomon, P. Sevvel, and J. J. Gunasekaran. “A review on the var-
ious processing parameters in FDM”. In: Materials Today: Proceedings 37
(2021), pp. 509–514.
[27]
Tatjana Dostalova et al. “3D stereolithography print (SLA) in clinical orthodon-
tic and dental applications”. In: Progress in Biomedical Optics and Imaging
- Proceedings of SPIE 11942 (2022). Edited by Rechmann, P. and Fried, D,
p. 1194207. ISSN: 0277-786X. DOI: 10.1117/12.2608661.
46
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:59==
[28]
P.S. Olin. “Presurgical Planning With CT-Derived Fabrication of Surgical
Guides”. eng. In: Yearbook of Dentistry 2007 (2007), pp. 111–112. ISSN:
00843717. DOI: 10.1016/S0084-3717(08)70387-8.
[29]
Alexander R Farid et al. “Enabling Technology in Fracture Surgery: State of
the Art”. In: JBJS 107.14 (2025), pp. 1636–1647.
[30]
Sven Yves Vetter et al. “Comparison of three different reduction methods
of the ankle mortise in unstable syndesmotic injuries”. In: Scientific Reports
9.1 (2019), p. 15445.
[31]
National Library of Medicine. PubMed Search: “3D printing medical”. Ac-
cessed July 27, 2025. 2025. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=
3d+printing+medical.
[32]
“Minimally invasive total knee arthroplasty”. eng. In: Clinical Privilege White
Paper 229 (2012), pp. 1–17.
[33]
Chloe Miller et al. “Surgeon hand size and grip strength for the design
of surgical instruments”. eng. In: Human Factors in Healthcare 7 (2025),
p. 100106. ISSN: 27725014. DOI: 10.1016/j.hfh.2025.100106.
[34]
Unaivable. Biomed Amber. URL: https : / / formlabs . com / store / materials /
biomed-amber-resin/. (accessed: 24.07.2025).
[35]
R. Van Noort, M. M. Black, and B. Harris. “DEVELOPMENTS IN THE BIOMED-
ICAL EVALUATION OF SILICONE RUBBER”. und. In: J Mater Sci 14.1
(1979), pp. 197–204. ISSN: 15734803, 00222461.
[36]
Alaka T. Panicker et al. “3D printing of medical-grade silicone elastomer to-
ward personalized soft tissue implants”. eng. In: Materials Today Chemistry
47 (2025), p. 102880. ISSN: 24685194. DOI: 10.1016/j.mtchem.2025.102880.
[37]
Jugal Parekh et al. “In vitro investigation of friction at the interface between
bone and a surgical instrument”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine 227.6
(2013), pp. 712–718. ISSN: 20413033, 09544119. DOI: 10.1177/0954411913483260.
[38]
Unaivable. Tensile testing machines. URL: https://www.hegewald-peschke.
com/products/universal- testing- machines/static- testing- machines/product-
detail/universal-testing-machine-inspekt-blue/. (accessed: 15.07.2025).
[39]
Unaivable. Planens ligning. URL: https://www.webmatematik.dk/lektioner/
matematik-a/vektorer-i-3d/planens-ligning. (accessed: 22.07.2025).
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
47
==PAGE:60==
48
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
A.1
Image of Universal testing machine used for
mechanical tests
Figure A.1: Image of the testing machine used for mechanical test of the clamp
solution, the particular model used for experiments for this thesis was the 50 kN
model. Image from [38]
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
49
==PAGE:62==
A.2
Python code
A.2.1
Interactive viewer (2D viewer)
1
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
2
import numpy as np
3
from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d.art3d import Poly3DCollection
4
import numpy as np
5
from skimage import measure
6
import vtk
7
from Data_init import load_dicom_folder
8
9
10
11
def interactive_viewer(volume_data):
12
13
volume , spacing = volume_data
# Unpack tuple
14
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 10))
15
plt.subplots_adjust(bottom=0.3)
16
slice_index = [0]
17
18
# Get vmin and vmax from the middle slice for better contrast
19
mid = volume.shape[0] // 2
20
vmin = volume[mid].min()
21
vmax = volume[mid].max()
22
23
img_data = volume[slice_index[0]]
24
img = ax.imshow(img_data , cmap='gray', vmin=vmin, vmax=vmax)
25
ax.set_title(f"Slice {slice_index[0]}")
26
ax.axis('off')
27
28
pixel_info = ax.text(
29
0.02, -0.08, "", transform=ax.transAxes , fontsize=12, color="
white",
30
bbox=dict(facecolor='black', alpha=0.7)
31
)
32
33
def update_display():
34
img.set_data(volume[slice_index[0]])
35
ax.set_title(f"Slice {slice_index[0]}")
36
fig.canvas.draw_idle()
37
38
def on_key(event):
39
if event.key == 'right':
40
slice_index[0] = min(slice_index[0] + 1, volume.shape[0] -
1)
41
update_display()
42
elif event.key == 'left':
43
slice_index[0] = max(slice_index[0] - 1, 0)
44
update_display()
45
46
def on_mouse_move(event):
47
if event.inaxes == ax and event.xdata is not None and event.
ydata is not None:
48
x = int(event.xdata)
49
y = int(event.ydata)
50
if 0 <= x < volume.shape[2] and 0 <= y < volume.shape[1]:
51
val = volume[slice_index[0], y, x]
50
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:63==
52
pixel_info.set_text(f"X: {x}, Y: {y}, Intensity: {val}
")
53
fig.canvas.draw_idle()
54
55
56
57
fig.canvas.mpl_connect('key_press_event', on_key)
58
fig.canvas.mpl_connect('motion_notify_event', on_mouse_move)
59
plt.show()
60
61
volume_data = load_dicom_folder(r"E:\DTU\Speciale\
BoneFracture_ConeBeam_CT\Skin\
0000D868")
62
interactive_viewer(volume_data)
A.2.2
STL writer
1
import os
2
import vtk
3
import numpy as np
4
from generate_bone_surface import generate_bone_surface
# Custom
function
5
from Data_init import load_dicom_folder
# DICOM loader
6
7
def save_surface_as_stl(surface , output_path):
8
writer = vtk.vtkSTLWriter()
9
writer.SetFileName(output_path)
10
writer.SetInputData(surface)
11
writer.Write()
12
print(f"[INFO] STL saved to: {output_path}")
13
14
15
if __name__ == "__main__":
16
dicom_path = input("Enter DICOM folder path: ").strip()
17
stl_path = input("Enter STL output path (e.g., output.stl): ").
strip()
18
target_faces = int(input("Enter target number of STL faces (e.g.,
8000): "))
19
post_smooth = input("Apply post-smoothing after decimation? (y/n):
").strip().lower() == 'y'
20
21
if not stl_path.endswith(".stl"):
22
raise ValueError("Output file must end with .stl")
23
volume, spacing = load_dicom_folder(dicom_path)
24
25
surface = generate_bone_surface(volume, spacing)
26
save_surface_as_stl(surface , stl_path)
27
print("[INFO] STL file saved successfully.")
A.2.3
generation of bone topology
1
import vtk
2
import numpy as np
3
from scipy import ndimage as ndi
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
51
==PAGE:64==
4
from scipy.ndimage import gaussian_filter
5
from vtk.util import numpy_support
6
from time_func import timed
7
8
@timed
9
def generate_bone_surface(volume, spacing ,
10
hu_range=(300, 1000),
11
gaussian_sigma=1.0,
12
surface_threshold=300,
13
surface_smooth=True,
14
volume_flip_axis=0,
15
return_volume=False):
16
# Bone segmmentataiion
17
bone_mask = (hu_range[0] <= volume) & (volume <= hu_range[1])
18
labeled_array , num_features = ndi.label(bone_mask)
19
sizes = ndi.sum(bone_mask , labeled_array , range(num_features + 1))
20
largest_label = sizes.argmax()
21
bone_only_mask = labeled_array == largest_label
22
volume_bone = np.where(bone_only_mask , volume, 0)
23
24
# Fill internal cavities in mask
25
filled_mask = ndi.binary_fill_holes(bone_only_mask)
26
27
volume_bone = np.where(filled_mask , volume, 0)
28
29
30
# Smoothing the bone volume
31
smoothed_volume = gaussian_filter(volume_bone , sigma=
gaussian_sigma)
32
33
# Convert to VTK image
34
vtk_data = smoothed_volume.astype(np.float32).ravel(order='F')
35
vtk_array = numpy_support.numpy_to_vtk(vtk_data , deep=True,
array_type=vtk.VTK_FLOAT)
36
37
vtk_image = vtk.vtkImageData()
38
vtk_image.SetDimensions(smoothed_volume.shape)
39
vtk_image.SetSpacing(spacing)
40
vtk_image.GetPointData().SetScalars(vtk_array)
41
42
# Marching cubes surface extraction
43
contour = vtk.vtkFlyingEdges3D()
44
contour.SetInputData(vtk_image)
45
contour.SetValue(0, surface_threshold)
46
contour.Update()
47
surface = contour.GetOutput()
48
49
# Optional surface smoothing
50
if surface_smooth:
51
smooth_filter = vtk.vtkSmoothPolyDataFilter()
52
smooth_filter.SetInputData(surface)
53
smooth_filter.SetNumberOfIterations(100)
54
smooth_filter.SetRelaxationFactor(0.1)
55
smooth_filter.FeatureEdgeSmoothingOff()
56
smooth_filter.BoundarySmoothingOn()
57
smooth_filter.Update()
58
surface = smooth_filter.GetOutput()
52
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:65==
59
60
61
62
if return_volume:
63
return surface , smoothed_volume
64
return surface
A.2.4
Plane from verticies
1
bl_info = {
2
"name": "Create Plane + Normal from 3 Vertices",
3
"author": "Benjamin Tang",
4
"version": (1, 1),
5
"blender": (2, 90, 0),
6
"location": "View3D > Mesh > Create Plane from 3 Vertices",
7
"description": "Creates a plane and a normal vector using 3
selected vertices of a mesh",
8
"category": "Mesh"
9
}
10
11
import bpy
12
import bmesh
13
import mathutils
14
from bpy.types import Operator
15
16
17
class MESH_OT_create_plane_from_vertices(Operator):
18
bl_idname = "mesh.create_plane_from_vertices"
19
bl_label = "Create Plane from 3 Vertices (with Normal)"
20
bl_options = {'REGISTER', 'UNDO'}
21
22
def execute(self, context):
23
# === Step 1: Get selected verts ===
24
obj = context.edit_object
25
if obj is None or obj.type != 'MESH':
26
self.report({'ERROR'}, "Must be in Edit Mode with a mesh
object.")
27
return {'CANCELLED'}
28
29
bm = bmesh.from_edit_mesh(obj.data)
30
selected_verts = [v.co.copy() for v in bm.verts if v.select]
31
if len(selected_verts) != 3:
32
self.report({'ERROR'}, "Select exactly 3 vertices.")
33
return {'CANCELLED'}
34
35
world_matrix = obj.matrix_world
36
points = [world_matrix @ v for v in selected_verts]
37
38
vec1 = points[1] - points[0]
39
vec2 = points[2] - points[0]
40
normal = vec1.cross(vec2).normalized()
41
center = sum(points, mathutils.Vector()) / 3
42
43
# === Step 2: Create the plane object ===
44
mesh = bpy.data.meshes.new("PlaneFromVerts")
45
plane = bpy.data.objects.new("PlaneFromVerts", mesh)
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
53
==PAGE:66==
46
context.collection.objects.link(plane)
47
48
bm_plane = bmesh.new()
49
size = 1.0
50
verts = [
51
bm_plane.verts.new((-size, -size, 0)),
52
bm_plane.verts.new((size, -size, 0)),
53
bm_plane.verts.new((size, size, 0)),
54
bm_plane.verts.new((-size, size, 0))
55
]
56
bm_plane.faces.new(verts)
57
bm_plane.to_mesh(mesh)
58
bm_plane.free()
59
60
plane.location = center
61
plane.rotation_mode = 'QUATERNION'
62
up = mathutils.Vector((0, 0, 1))
63
plane.rotation_quaternion = up.rotation_difference(normal)
64
65
# === Step 3: Switch to Object Mode ===
66
if context.object.mode != 'OBJECT' and bpy.ops.object.mode_set
.poll():
67
bpy.ops.object.mode_set(mode='OBJECT')
68
69
# === Step 4: Add normal vector arrow ===
70
for area in context.window.screen.areas:
71
if area.type == 'VIEW_3D':
72
for region in area.regions:
73
if region.type == 'WINDOW':
74
context_override = {
75
'window': context.window,
76
'screen': context.screen,
77
'area': area,
78
'region': region,
79
'scene': context.scene,
80
'blend_data': context.blend_data ,
81
'space_data': area.spaces.active,
82
}
83
84
bpy.ops.object.empty_add(context_override ,
type='
ARROWS',
location=
center)
85
arrow = context.active_object
86
arrow.name = "NormalVector"
87
arrow.rotation_mode = 'QUATERNION'
88
arrow.rotation_quaternion = up.
rotation_difference
(normal)
89
arrow.scale = (0.2, 0.2, 0.2)
90
91
self.report({'INFO'}, "Plane and normal vector
created."
)
92
return {'FINISHED'}
93
54
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:67==
94
self.report({'ERROR'}, "Plane created , but no 3D View
found for arrow.")
95
return {'CANCELLED'}
96
97
98
def menu_func(self, context):
99
self.layout.operator(MESH_OT_create_plane_from_vertices.bl_idname)
100
101
102
def register():
103
bpy.utils.register_class(MESH_OT_create_plane_from_vertices)
104
bpy.types.VIEW3D_MT_edit_mesh.append(menu_func)
105
106
107
def unregister():
108
bpy.utils.unregister_class(MESH_OT_create_plane_from_vertices)
109
bpy.types.VIEW3D_MT_edit_mesh.remove(menu_func)
110
111
112
if __name__ == "__main__":
113
register()
A.2.5
3D visualizer
1
import vtk
2
from vtk.util import numpy_support
3
from time_func import timed
4
5
6
@timed
7
def visualize_surface(surface):
8
mapper = vtk.vtkPolyDataMapper()
9
mapper.SetInputData(surface)
10
mapper.SetScalarVisibility(False)
11
12
actor = vtk.vtkActor()
13
actor.SetMapper(mapper)
14
actor.GetProperty().SetColor(1.0, 1.0, 1.0)
# White surface
15
16
renderer = vtk.vtkRenderer()
17
renderer.AddActor(actor)
18
renderer.SetBackground(0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
19
20
render_window = vtk.vtkRenderWindow()
21
render_window.AddRenderer(renderer)
22
render_window.SetSize(800, 800)
23
24
render_window_interactor = vtk.vtkRenderWindowInteractor()
25
render_window_interactor.SetRenderWindow(render_window)
26
27
# === Add Axes Widget ===
28
axes = vtk.vtkAxesActor()
29
axes.SetTotalLength(50, 50, 50)
# Set size of axes
30
axes.AxisLabelsOn()
31
axes.SetNormalizedTipLength([0.1, 0.1, 0.1])
32
axes.SetNormalizedShaftLength([0.9, 0.9, 0.9])
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
55
==PAGE:68==
33
34
axes_widget = vtk.vtkOrientationMarkerWidget()
35
axes_widget.SetOrientationMarker(axes)
36
axes_widget.SetInteractor(render_window_interactor)
37
axes_widget.SetViewport(0.0, 0.0, 0.2, 0.2)
# Bottom -left corner
38
axes_widget.SetEnabled(1)
39
axes_widget.InteractiveOn()
40
41
render_window.Render()
42
render_window_interactor.Start()
43
44
return render_window_interactor
A.2.6
Watershed segmentation
1
import numpy as np
2
import vtk
3
from Data_init import load_dicom_folder
4
from skimage.morphology import h_maxima
5
from scipy.ndimage import gaussian_filter
6
from vtk.util import numpy_support
7
from scipy.ndimage import distance_transform_edt , label
8
from skimage.segmentation import watershed
9
from generate_bone_surface import generate_bone_surface
10
import random
11
from time_func import timed
12
from skimage.morphology import ball, opening
13
14
15
@timed
16
def watershed_segmentation_and_view(volume_bone , spacing , fragment_ids
=None, h=1.50):
17
bone_mask = volume_bone > 0
18
19
# Optional morphological cleanup
20
bone_mask = opening(bone_mask , ball(6))
# helps isolate thin
necks
21
22
distance = distance_transform_edt(bone_mask)
23
distance = gaussian_filter(distance , sigma=0.8)
# less blurring
24
25
local_max = h_maxima(distance , h=h)
# more sensitive peak
detection
26
markers , _ = label(local_max)
27
28
labels = watershed(-distance , markers , mask=bone_mask)
29
30
unique_labels = np.unique(labels)
31
unique_labels = unique_labels[unique_labels != 0]
32
print(f"[INFO] Watershed found {len(unique_labels)} fragments: {
unique_labels.tolist()}")
33
return labels , unique_labels
34
35
@timed
36
def visualize_watershed_fragments(labels, spacing):
37
56
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:69==
38
renderer = vtk.vtkRenderer()
39
renderer.SetBackground(0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
40
41
unique_labels = np.unique(labels)
42
for label_val in unique_labels:
43
if label_val == 0:
44
continue
# Skip background
45
46
# Create binary mask for the fragment
47
fragment_mask = (labels == label_val).astype(np.uint8)
48
49
# Convert to float for VTK
50
flat = fragment_mask.ravel(order='F')
51
vtk_array = numpy_support.numpy_to_vtk(flat, deep=True,
array_type=vtk.VTK_FLOAT)
52
53
vtk_image = vtk.vtkImageData()
54
vtk_image.SetDimensions(fragment_mask.shape)
55
vtk_image.SetSpacing(spacing)
56
vtk_image.GetPointData().SetScalars(vtk_array)
57
contour = vtk.vtkMarchingCubes()
58
contour.SetInputData(vtk_image)
59
contour.SetValue(0, 0.5)
60
contour.Update()
61
smoother = vtk.vtkSmoothPolyDataFilter()
62
smoother.SetInputConnection(contour.GetOutputPort())
63
smoother.SetNumberOfIterations(30)
64
smoother.SetRelaxationFactor(0.1)
65
smoother.BoundarySmoothingOn()
66
smoother.Update()
67
mapper = vtk.vtkPolyDataMapper()
68
mapper.SetInputConnection(smoother.GetOutputPort())
69
mapper.SetScalarVisibility(False)
70
71
actor = vtk.vtkActor()
72
actor.SetMapper(mapper)
73
actor.GetProperty().SetColor(random.random(), random.random(),
random.random())
74
75
renderer.AddActor(actor)
76
77
# This is where you plot!
78
render_window = vtk.vtkRenderWindow()
79
render_window.AddRenderer(renderer)
80
render_window.SetSize(1000, 1000)
81
82
interactor = vtk.vtkRenderWindowInteractor()
83
interactor.SetRenderWindow(render_window)
84
85
render_window.Render()
86
interactor.Start()
87
88
volume , spacing = load_dicom_folder(r"E:\DTU\Speciale\
BoneFracture_ConeBeam_CT\Skin\
000037C1")
89
surface , volume_bone = generate_bone_surface(volume, spacing ,
return_volume=True)
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
57
==PAGE:70==
90
labels , unique_labels = watershed_segmentation_and_view(volume_bone ,
spacing ,h=4)
91
visualize_watershed_fragments(labels, spacing)
58
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:71==
A.3
Proof of construction of plane from 3 points
Construction of plane from 3 points proof.
Given a point P(x, y, z) be a fixed point to a plane, and Q(x, y, z) be any arbitrary
point on the plane, and given a normal to the plane denoted as n =< A, B, C >
thereby it follows that b =< a, b, c > and r =< x, y, z > the vector ⃗
PQ = r −b =<
x −a, y −b, z −c > lies in the plane and is orthogonal to n, therefore leading to
n · (r −b) = 0, this leads to the point normal equation [39]
A(x −a) + B(y −b) + C(z −c) = D
This information is used when the construction of the fracture plane is interpreted
onto the digital model in the program blender.
A.4
Formlabs Biomed black 4.1 datasheet
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
59
==PAGE:72==
GENERAL PURPOSE RESIN
Black Resin V4.1
An optimally-balanced Black Resin for versatile applications
Black Resin is perfect for general-purpose prototyping and design, and models with intricate details.  
With a matte surface finish, opaque appearance, and precise details, prints are ready to use right off  
the printer. Its neutral undertone makes a great base for parts that will eventually be painted or 
undergo other finishing processes.
Black Resin V4.1 is compatible with Form 3 Series printers. Black Resin V4.1 produces deeper black 
parts compared to Black Resin V4 (Legacy) and offers improved print reliability.
Form and fit  
prototyping
Presentation-ready 
models with fine 
features and  
intricate details
Enclosures  
and housings
Jigs and  
fixtures
V4.1
FLGPBK41
Prepared
10/11/2024
To the best of our knowledge the information contained herein is accurate. However, 
Formlabs, Inc. makes no warranty, expressed or implied, regarding the accuracy of these 
results to be obtained from the use thereof.
Rev.
01
10/11/2024
==PAGE:73==
1 Material properties may vary based on part geometry, print orientation, print settings, temperature,  
and disinfection or sterilization methods used.
2 Data was obtained from parts printed on a Form 3 printer with 100 µm Black Resin V4.1 settings,  
washed in a Form Wash for 5 minutes in ≥99% Isopropyl Alcohol, and post-cured at 60°C for 30 minutes 
in a Form Cure.
SOLVENT COMPATIBILITY
Percent weight gain over 24 hours for a printed 1 x 1 x 1 cm cube immersed in respective solvent:
Mechanical Properties
METRIC
IMPERIAL
METHOD
GREEN
POST-CURED 
30MIN @ 60C
GREEN
POST-CURED 
30MIN @ 60C
Ultimate Tensile Strength
31 MPa
48 MPa
4496 psi
6962 psi
ASTM D 638-14
Tensile Modulus
1427 MPa
2081 MPa
207 ksi
302 ksi
ASTM D 638-14
Elongation at Break (X/Y)
24%
12%
24%
12%
ASTM D 638-14
Flexural Properties
METRIC
IMPERIAL
METHOD
Flexural Strength
47 MPa
89 MPa
6817 psi
12908 psi
ASTM D 790-15
Flexural Modulus
1050 MPa
2260 MPa
152 ksi
328 ksi
ASTM D 790-15
Impact Properties
METRIC
IMPERIAL
METHOD
Notched Izod
29 J/m
27 J/m
0.551  
ft-lbs/in
0.511  
ft-lbs/in
ASTM D256-10
Thermal Properties
METRIC
IMPERIAL
METHOD
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 1.8 MPa
56 °C
65 °C
133 °F
149 °F
ASTM D 648-16
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 0.45 MPa
49 °C
55 °C
120 °F
131 °F
ASTM D 648-16
Solvent
24 hr weight gain (%)
Imperial
24 hr weight gain (%)
Acetic Acid 5%
0.5
Mineral oil, heavy
0.0
Acetone
3.1
Mineral oil, light
0.0
Bleach ~5% NaOCl
0.4
Salt Water (3.5% NaCl)
0.4
Butyl Acetate
-0.1
Skydrol 5
0.2
Diesel Fuel
0.0
Sodium hydroxide solution 
(0.025% pH = 10)
0.4
Diethyl glycol monomethyl ether
0.5
Hydraulic Oil
0.5
Strong Acid (HCl Conc)
0.2
Hydrogen peroxide (3%)
0.0
TPM
0.1
Isooctane
0.0
Water
0.5
Isopropyl Alcohol
-0.1
Xylene
0.0
==PAGE:74==
A.5
Marching cubes algorithm
The Marching Cubes algorithm is a foundational technique in computer graphics
and scientific visualization, used to extract polygonal surface meshes from volu-
metric scalar fields. In the context of medical imaging, such as CT or MRI data, it is
widely employed to reconstruct anatomical surfaces—such as bone contours—by
generating an isosurface from a stack of 2D image slices.
A.5.1
Conceptual Overview
Given a 3D scalar field (e.g., voxel intensities from a CT scan), the algorithm
identifies the surface that corresponds to a specific scalar value, known as the
isovalue. This isosurface is the set of points in 3D space where the scalar value
equals the chosen threshold (e.g., Hounsfield Unit value for cortical bone).
A.5.2
Algorithm Workflow
1. Cube Construction: The volume is divided into a uniform grid of cubes,
where each cube consists of 8 neighboring voxel points.
2. Vertex Classification: Each corner of the cube is compared to the chosen
iso-value. If the scalar value at a corner is above the threshold, it is marked
as ins the surface; otherwise, it is marked as “outside.” This results in a
binary pattern of 8 bits, corresponding to 28 = 256 possible configurations.
3. Lookup Table: A precomputed lookup table maps each binary configuration
to a set of triangle edges that approximate the isosurface through the cube.
4. Edge Interpolation: For each intersected edge, the exact vertex position of
the triangle is determined using linear interpolation between the voxel values
at the edge’s endpoints.
5. Mesh Construction: Triangles generated from each cube are assembled
into a continuous mesh that approximates the desired isosurface.
A.6
Biomed Amber
Techincal documentation of Biomed amber Resin, from [34]
62
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
==PAGE:75==
1
MEDICAL RESIN
BioMed Amber Resin
Biocompatible Photopolymer Resin for Formlabs SLA Printers
BioMed Amber Resin is a rigid material for biocompatible applications requiring short-
term contact. Parts printed with BioMed Amber Resin are compatible with common solvent 
disinfection and sterilization methods. BioMed Amber Resin is manufactured in our ISO 13485 
facility.
Medical devices and device components
Research and development
Surgical planning and implant sizing tools
V1
FLBMAM01
Prepared
11/04/2019
To the best of our knowledge the information contained herein is accurate. However, 
Formlabs, Inc. makes no warranty, expressed or implied, regarding the accuracy of these 
results to be obtained from the use thereof.
Rev.
01
31/01/2023
==PAGE:76==
2
Material Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Post-Cured 2
Post-Cured 2
Tensile Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Ultimate Tensile Strength
73 MPa
11 ksi
ASTM D638-10 (Type IV)
Young’s Modulus
2900 MPa
420 ksi
ASTM D638-10 (Type IV)
Elongation at Break
12%
ASTM D638-10 (Type IV)
Flexural Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Flexural Strength
103 MPa
15 ksi
ASTM D790-15 (Method B)
Flexural Modulus
2500 MPa
363 ksi
ASTM D790-15 (Method B)
Hardness Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Hardness Shore D
67 D
ASTM D2240-15 (Type D)
Impact Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Notched Izod
28 J/m
0.53 ft-lb/in
ASTM D256-10 (Method A)
Unnotched Izod
142 J/m
2.6 ft-lb/in
ASTM D4812-11
Thermal Properties
METRIC 1
IMPERIAL 1
METHOD
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 1.8 MPa
65 °C
149 °F
ASTM D648-18 (Method B)
Heat Deflection Temp. @ 0.45 MPa
78 °C
172 °F
ASTM D648-18 (Method B)
Coefficient of Thermal Expansion
66 µm/m/°C
37 µin/in/°F
ASTM E831-14
Sterilization Compatibility
E-beam
35 kGy E-beam radiation
Ethylene Oxide
100% Ethylene oxide at 55 °C 
for 180 minutes
Gamma
29.4 - 31.2 kGy gamma radiation
Steam Sterilization
Autoclave at 134 °C for 20 minutes
Autoclave at 121 °C for 30 minutes
For more details on sterilization compatibilities, visit formlabs.com/medical
Disinfection Compatibility
Chemical Disinfection
70% Isopropyl Alcohol for 5 
minutes
The product was developed and is in compliance with the following ISO Standards:
ISO Standard
Description
EN ISO 13485:2016
Medical Devices – Quality Management Systems – Requirements for Regulatory Purposes
EN ISO 14971:2012
Medical Devices – Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices
1 Material properties may vary based on part geometry, print 
orientation, print settings, temperature, and disinfection or 
sterilization methods used.
2 Data for post-cured samples were measured on Type IV tensile bars printed on a Form 2 and 
Form 3B (impact and thermal measurements) printers with 100 µm BioMed Amber Resin settings, 
washed in a Form Wash for 20 minutes in 99% Isopropyl Alcohol, and post-cured at 60 °C for 30 
minutes in a Form Cure.
3 BioMed Amber Resin was tested at NAMSA World 
Headquarters, OH, USA.
BioMed Amber Resin has been evaluated in accordance with ISO 10993-1:2018, Biological evaluation of medical devices - Part 1: 
Evaluation and testing within a risk management process, and ISO 7405:2009/(R)2015, Dentistry - Evaluation of biocompatibility 
of medical devices used in dentistry, and passed the requirements for the following biocompatibility risks:
ISO Standard
Description 3
ISO Standard
Description 3
ISO 10993-5:2009
Not cytotoxic
ISO 10993-11: 2017
No evidence of acute systemic toxicity
ISO 10993-10:2010/(R)2014
Not an irritant
ISO 10993-11: 2017/USP, General 
Chapter <151>, Pyrogen Test
Non-pyrogenic
ISO 10993-10:2010/(R)2014
Not a sensitizer
==PAGE:77==
3D personalized clamp solutions for orthopedic surgery
65
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
ØrstedsPlads, Building 348C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/msc-programmes/biomedical-engineering
