==PAGE:1==
Underwater Visual­SLAM
for Surveillance of Critical Maritime Infrastructure
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Underwater Visual­SLAM
for Surveillance of Critical Maritime Infrastructure
Master Thesis
September, 2025
By
Theodor Nørby­Lassen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been a collaboration between DTU Aqua and DTU Electro, at the Techni­
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of algebra, deep learning,
statistics, robotics and image processing.
Theodor Nørby­Lassen ­ s194055
Signature
Date
ii
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Critical maritime infrastructure requires regular inspection, but underwater environments
limit common sensing: optical methods suffer heavy attenuation and scattering while
acoustics trade resolution for range. This project investigates whether a dense visual–
inertial SLAM pipeline that fuses stereo­derived dense reconstructions with IMU con­
straints can provide reliable mapping and trajectory estimates for maritime inspection.
We implement a pipeline that converts rectified stereo imagery into dense point clouds
using a pretrained foundation­stereo model, suppresses erroneous “open­water” depth
hallucinations via SAM­based segmentation combined with an edge/area heuristic, and
feeds the filtered point clouds together with IMU data into a range–inertial SLAM back­
end. The system is evaluated qualitatively on an in­field harbor sequence and quantita­
tively in a controlled pool with motion­capture and depth references. Results show that
foundation­stereo generalizes zero­shot to underwater imagery well enough to produce
visually meaningful reconstructions, and that the SLAM backend can yield qualitatively
consistent trajectories and maps once open­water artifacts are masked. At the same time
the pipeline exhibits substantial spatial noise and a depth­scaling bias—primarily caused
by a processing error (use of pre­rectification intrinsics) and unmodeled refractive distor­
tion from the housing port—and is sensitive to surface reflections and plane­dominated
scenes. We conclude the approach is promising but not yet operational; immediate priori­
ties are correcting processing errors, applying refractive/housing calibration, and strength­
ening registration via multi­sensor point cloud fusion.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Adolfo Damiano Cafaro, Ph.D. Candidate, DTU Electro
Thank you for the weekly sparring and feedback both in terms of technical assistance,
overall project guidance and in writing this thesis report.
Fletcher Francis Thompson, Researcher, DTU Aqua
Thank you for your invaluable technical assistance and rapid support in ASTA and on the
ROV.
Christian Laurberg Haslund Westerdahl, Research Assistant, DTU Electro
Thank you for daily technical support, insightful discussions, and excellent coffee.
Gonzalo de León, Postdoc, DTU Electro
Thank you for frequent professional sparring on topics central to this thesis.
Julius Wirbel, Ph.D. Candidate, DTU Electro
Thank you for help setting up the development framework and for assistance with 3D
printing.
Roberto Galeazzi, Associate professor, DTU Electro
Thank you for entrusting me with a challenging and rewarding project.
iv
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Acronyms & Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Focus for the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background theory
5
2.1
Frames of reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Environmental challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Depth Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Foundation Stereo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Point clouds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
SLAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.7
GLIM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Methods
21
3.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Proposed method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
GLIM settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Domain adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7
Final implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4
Results
41
4.1
ASTA Pool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
Point cloud assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
GLIM assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.4
Troubleshooting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5
Discussion & Future Work
61
6
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
71
A.1 Ladder sequence views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.2 Back/forth sequence setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Underwater Visual­SLAM
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms & Abbreviations
ASTA Autonomous Systems Test Arena (DTU test facility). 41, 42, 51, 57, 62
AUV Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. 1
CMI Critical Maritime Infrastructure. 1
CNN Convolutional Neural Network. 12
CSV Comma­Separated Values (tabular data file format). 41
DoF Degrees of Freedom. 5
DVL Doppler Velocity Log. 2
EIF Extended Information Filter. 2
EKF Extended Kalman Filter. 2
ENU East North Up. 26, 28, 44
FOV Field Of View. 22, 51, 57, 58
FSD Foundation Stereo Dataset. 11
GICP Generalized Iterative Closest Point. 13, 63
GPS Global Positioning System. 1, 6
GPU Graphics Processing Unit. 14–16
ICP Iterative Closest Point. 3, 12, 13
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit. 1, 2, 16, 18, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 44, 61, 62, 65
IR Infrared. 12
LiDAR Light Detection And Ranging. 1, 6, 8, 15, 25, 28, 29
NED North East Down. 32
PF Particle Filter. 2
PS4 PlayStation 4 (controller). 21
RADAR Radio Detection and Ranging. 6
RGB Red Green Blue. 8, 12
RGB­D Red Green Blue + Depth. 15
RMSE Root Mean Square Error. 52
vi
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:9==
ROS Robot Operating System. 21, 22, 26, 29
ROV Remotely Operated Vehicle. 1, 21, 27, 37–39, 41–46, 51, 52, 56–58, 61–63, 65
SAM Segment Anything Model (image segmentation foundation model). 32–34, 36, 61
SAM2 Segment Anything Model 2 (successor to SAM). 32, 33
SBL Short­Baseline acoustic positioning (SBL). 27
SL Structured Light. 3
SLAM Simultaneous Localization and Mapping. 14, 15, 22, 23, 25, 26, 31, 35, 37, 38,
42, 51, 56–58
SONAR Sound Navigation And Ranging. 15
SOTA State Of The Art. 10, 11, 24
ToF Time of Flight. 6
VGICP Voxelized Generalized Iterative Closest Point. 3, 14–16, 58, 63
VSLAM Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping. 1–3, 61, 65
Underwater Visual­SLAM
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The underwater realm constitutes over 70% of Earth’s surface, yet it still remains largely
unexplored, due to the significant challenges present for human endeavor [1].
Despite these challenges we are seeing an increasing global reliance on Critical Maritime
Infrastructure (CMI). The European Union defines CMI as infrastructure which contributes
to the maintenance of vital societal functions, health, safety, security, economic or well­
being of people. This includes infrastructure in areas of shipping, energy, communication
and fishing [2]. The structural health of these underwater infrastructures is constantly de­
grading due to aging, fatigue, unexpected loads, and environmental wear and tear [3], and
therefore necessitates frequent inspection. Monitoring of CMI has become more preva­
lent due to the recent sociopolitical developments, together with concrete incidents like the
2022 Nord Stream pipeline attacks, which have highlighted the significant vulnerabilities
of CMI, bringing their protection to the forefront of the political agenda [2].
Historically, inspection has been performed predominantly by human divers. This method
is expensive, time­consuming and potentially dangerous for those involved. Furthermore,
many of the inspection targets are inaccessible to humans due to rapid currents, low
visibility, adverse weather conditions, and risk of exposure to chemicals or radiation [3].
While Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) have been deployed for surveys, such cases
have been infrequent and reactive, and remain time­consuming due to the need for a
human operator [4]. The need for a safer, cost­effective, proactive and scalable method
for inspection has led to the development of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs).
These robotic platforms are increasingly being adopted, and viewed as an indispensable
tools for underwater inspection [1] [2].
Despite the advancements in AUV technology, significant challenges to operating in un­
derwater environments still persist, especially with regards to navigation and perception
[3]. Global Positioning System (GPS) cannot be transmitted underwater, rendering the
sensor ineffective [3]. Light Detection And Rangings (LiDARs) suffer from heavy attenu­
ation of its signal which significantly limits the working range. Acoustic sensors generally
remain robust under water, but they are challenged by acoustic echoes in enclosed envi­
ronments and also lack the fine spatial detail [5].
To address the demand for high­precision localization and mapping in these challenging
conditions, Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (VSLAM) has emerged as a
promising technology due to its low cost and ability to capture rich environmental infor­
mation [6].
Applying VSLAM under water is however difficult, as visual information from the environ­
ment often exhibits insufficient texture, low lighting and frequent dropouts. To overcome
these inherent limitations of a purely visual SLAM system, sensor fusion has emerged as
a robust and necessary approach. By integrating data from diverse sensing modalities
simultaneously, this strategy can exploit multiple sources of complementary information
to enhance adaptability, reliability, and resilience in complex underwater environments [3]
[7].
This master project aims to design and develop a VSLAM algorithm to enable the surveil­
lance of Critical Maritime Infrastructure, exploring the integration of a stereo camera sys­
tem with an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
Underwater Visual­SLAM
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Focus for the project
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• Demonstrate the novel approach of using deep learning for 3D­reconstruction of real
underwater scenes, based on stereo imagery.
• Apply a range­based SLAM algorithm on the point cloud reconstructions, to enable
the localization and mapping of underwater vehicles.
1.2
Literature review
SLAM: Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a method that aims to simul­
taneously create a map of an unknown environment and estimate its pose within that
environment [8]. Many modern SLAM algorithms use a two­stage estimation approach
which first estimates the ego­motion of the sensor, usually in real­time, and then cor­
rects accumulated errors in a global optimization module [9]. Some algorithms further
separate the optimization module into multiple modules, e.g. sub­mapping and global
mapping like in GLIM [9]. The separation of optimization modules is mainly motivated to
facilitate multiple optimization steps with varying computational demands, but can also,
as with ORB­SLAM3 [10], be use to add robustness to tracking losses during exploration,
by including a multi­mapping module.
Optimization: Early underwater SLAM algorithms used filtering­based approaches for
the optimization, including Extended Kalman Filters (EKFs), Particle Filters (PFs) and
Extended Information Filters (EIFs), whereas the more recently used VSLAM algorithms
mainly include graph optimization and pose graph optimization. Graph­based SLAM, es­
pecially using factor graphs, is commonly used due to its intuitive visual representation
and, in the case of factor­graphs, versatility in adding constraints which can be any arbi­
trary functions [6] [11].
Visual SLAM: Cameras are attractive sensors due to their low cost, small size, and rich
environmental information [6]. However, underwater visual conditions significantly limit
their usable range due to heavy light attenuation [1]. Furthermore suspended particles
can blur or even block the camera sensor, causing momentary visual dropouts. Two
common approaches are used to circumvent the shortcomings of cameras under water: 1)
underwater image enhancement algorithms [6] and/or 2) fusing multiple complementary
sensing modalities, such as sonars and IMUs [1]. Few works have demonstrated the
applicability of VSLAM underwater, most being based on an ORB­SLAM family: In [7]
ORB­SLAM2 was fused with Doppler Velocity Log (DVL), gyroscope and a depth sensor
to increase its accuracy and enable operation in low lighting, fast motions and feature­
sparse environments. [12] used tightly coupled visual and DVL fusion to significantly
improve the accuracy of ORB­SLAM3.
Loose vs. tight IMU coupling: The camera and IMU sensors can either be fused loosely,
where each independently estimate their own pose and then fuse the results, or tightly,
where both sensors are used simultaneously to optimize the pose. The tightly coupled
method enables robust estimation in environments with insufficient geometric information
because the IMU helps constraint the sensor state. Tightly coupled methods have also
been shown to achieve higher accuracy than loose ones [9] [10] [12].
Feature vs. direct point cloud registration: Between consecutive images VSLAM per­
forms image processing to extract points and find correspondences in the subsequent
frame. This constrains the pose of the sensor. The method for how the points are ex­
tracted and compared depends on the type of camera sensor used; monocular, stereo
2
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:13==
or RGB­D. Monocular and stereo sensors require image processing to extract points,
whereas RGB­D sensors directly infer the depth either through built in algorithms or built
in range sensor based on light emission. The types of VSLAM methods can be divided
into two types that differ in the amount of points they extract and the method for the point
extraction. The methods are: feature­based and direct methods[13]
Feature­based methods seek to extract sparse robust points. Although feature­based
methods extract reliable points, they are sensitive to outliers and may fail in textureless
and dynamic environments, characteristics common in underwater scenes [5]. Further­
more, since they only extract a small number of points, the created maps are sparse
and provide less information than dense ones [13]. Regardless of these shortcomings,
most underwater VSLAM uses feature point methods for matching, as they are able to
handle the lighting disturbances in underwater scenes [6]. Direct methods avoid feature­
extraction and makes use of most points for matching, which makes them less sensitive
to outliers. Dense methods are typically more computationally demanding which limits
their real­time use. Most algorithms make use of point cloud registration to determine the
translation between point scans of consecutive frames. The most common registration
algorithms used are of the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) family owing to their accuracy and
robustness [9]. [9] uses GPU­acceleration on a ICP variant (Voxelized Generalized Iter­
ative Closest Point (VGICP)) to achieve real­time matching on dense point clouds. The
matching can either be frame­to­frame, meaning that only sequential frames are matched,
or frame­to­model where each frame is matched to an internal map representation based
on the previous frames. The frame­to­model approach reduces the estimation drift and
makes the matching more robust by allowing some frames to be completely degenerate
[9].
Dense stereo matching underwater Dense Stereo matching can be either active, where
the camera sensor emits a Structured Light (SL) pattern to aid the correspondence search,
or passive, where the cameras rely on the ambient lighting in the scene [14]. While SL
can increase the matching in textureless scenes, it is challenged by back­scattered light
from suspended particles [14].
Traditionally approaches for stereo matching determined correspondences directly based
on pixel values. The approaches can be categorized into local methods (faster, lower
computational cost, based on pixel values within a window) and global methods (higher
accuracy, but more computationally complex, based on pixel values from parts of the
entire image). In the last decade, the field has been predominantly focused on learning
based approaches, primarily due to the limitations of traditional methods in accuracy, and
poor generalization to unseen domains, due to the extensive requirement for fine­tuning
[15] [16].
Underwater Visual­SLAM
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:15==
2
Background theory
To present our methods and results precisely, we summarize the necessary theoretical
background and fix the notation used throughout the thesis. We begin with the core op­
erations and conventions for describing robot kinematics, followed by an overview of the
maritime environment and the practical challenges it poses. Together, these sections
establish the theoretical foundation for the work that follows.
2.1
Frames of reference
The position and orientation (pose) of a rigid body (i.e. a robot) in 6 Degrees of Freedom
(DoF) is described by a 3D coordinate p = [x, y, z] and three angles of rotation θ = [ψ, θ, ϕ]
known as Euler angles. The pose is described relative to a coordinate frame. A coordi­
nate frame {A} consists of a point of origin oA and three mutually orthogonal unit vectors
ˆxA, ˆyA, ˆzA. To denote the frame of reference we denote the frame as a superscript. E.g.
for a point p referenced to frame {A}
pA = [aˆxA, bˆyA, cˆzA]
(2.1)
It is often convenient to use multiple frames when referencing the pose of a robot. Specif­
ically, local frames on the sensors or robot, together with a global frame (usually called
the world frame {W}) provide a reference for the absolute trajectory [17].
2.1.1
Transformations
The evolution of a rigid body can be described by using rotations (R ∈R3×3) and trans­
lations (t ∈R3). Translations are simply performed by adding a vector corresponding to
the translation:
p′ = p + t
(2.2)
Rotations are linear maps represented by a 3×3 matrix and are applied to a point through
matrix multiplication:
p′ = Rp
(2.3)
A transformation is then described by both a rotation and a translation:
p′ = Rp + t
(2.4)
Applying both a rotation and translation yields a full transformation. Care must be taken
about the ordering which they are applied, since R(p+t) ̸= Rp+t. The order is determined
by which frame the translation and rotation is defined in ­ they must also be applied to
points within that same reference.
We denote transformations between frame {A} and another frame {B} as T B
A . Such a
transformation can be described as a homogeneous matrix T ∈R⋭×⋭:
T B
A =
RB
A
tB
A
0
1

(2.5)
Homogeneous transformations are easy to work with because they allow us to perform
both translation and rotation by a simple matrix multiplication [17], e.g:
pB = T B
A pA
(2.6)
Underwater Visual­SLAM
5
==PAGE:16==
2.1.2
Quaternions
Quaternions are a way of describing 3D rotations which are computationally efficient, i.e.
they are described by only 4 numbers instead of the 9 required for rotation matrices, and
unlike Euler angles representation, avoid the problem of what is known as a Gimbal locks.
Gimbal lock is a loss of one degree of freedom that can occur during rotation using Euler
angles if two of the rotation angles line up. For these reasons most software that perform
rotation utilizes the quaternion representation [18].
Quaternions are described as follows:
q = w + xi + yj + zk
(2.7)
To use a quaternion to perform rotation you must either convert the vector to be rotated
into a quaternion, e.g. .g.pquat = pxi + pyj + pzk pB = T B
A pA and the apply the quaternion
directly p′ = qpq, or convert the quaternion to a rotation matrix. The latter can be done
using the following equation:
R =


1 −2(j2 + k2)
2(ij −wk)
2(ik + wj)
2(ij + wk)
1 −2(i2 + k2)
2(jk −wi)
2(ik −wj)
2(jk + wi)
1 −2(i2 + j2)


(2.8)
2.2
Environmental challenges
Operation in the underwater environment presents significant challenges, which make it
substantially different from terrestrial environments. Many terrestrial sensing devices like
LiDAR, Radio Detection and Ranging (RADAR), GPS and Time of Flight (ToF) sensors
are ineffective or obsolete underwater due to the electromagnetic wave attenuation of the
environment. For this reason, the sensing modalities most commonly used underwater
are based on acoustics (e.g., sonars), because they remain robust even in difficult wa­
ter conditions. However, sonars have much lower bandwidth compared to cameras and
also lack detailed 3D spatial information. Optical sensors fall somewhere in between the
acoustic and electromagnetic modalities ­ they provide useful information, but are heav­
ily affected by water’s attenuation of light. The degree to which the light is absorbed
increases with the distance it has traveled. This inherently limits the range of cameras
when used under water. The attenuation is not even across the visible spectrum; blue
and green light persist for longest, reaching around 30 meters, while red light disappears
at less than 7 meters, and yellow and orange at 15 meters, see figure 2.1. Due to these
range limitations, [19] provides a table where they propose suitable sensors to use at dif­
ferent ranges (see table 2.1). Since we will be using the camera as our primary sensing
modality, range limitation must be considered
Figure 2.1: (left) Light attenuation vs depth of different colors under water. (right) Light
absorption of different colors vs the absorption coefficient of water which is increased e.g.
by suspended particles[19]
6
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.1: Summary of sensors for robot’s underwater perception at different ranges [19]
Range
Sensing modalities
Available data
Robot perception ca­
pability
30m–10km
USBL,
Acoustic
modems
Range, heading
Approach
the
target
using
heading
infor­
mation
5m–30m
Sonar
Acoustic data
Detection,
tracking
and recognition using
motion features
1m–5m
Sonar, Camera
Acoustic data, optical
data
Detection,
track­
ing
and
recognition
using
data­fusion
approaches
< 1m
Sonar, Camera
Acoustic data, optical
data
Pose estimation, 3D
point­cloud
recon­
struction
Figure 2.2: Examples of back­scattering caused by using artificial lighting in the presence
of suspended particles [19]
2.2.1
Optical sensors
The light attenuation is not only due to water itself but also suspended particles such as
biological matter, algae and dissolved organic matter, which can further attenuate light,
especially in the blue wavelengths. Since the attenuation is heavily affected by depth it
means that deep dives require artificial (active) lighting. The use of active lighting however,
can end up worsening the image if used in the presence of suspended particles, because
the light scattered from them will be reflected directly back into the camera, and dominate
the image. This effect is known as back­scattering, and it significantly reduces the contrast
in the image even to the point of ’blinding’ the camera, see example in figure 2.2
Despite these challenges, cameras are still used extensively under water because they
provide high resolution images and offer rich spatial and feature information. To leverage
the strengths of optical images in perception tasks, other sensor modalities are often used
in conjunction to effectively ’cover’ the camera during dropouts. Optical and acoustic
sensors form a complementary pair of modalities: acoustic sensors provide long range
and robustness, while cameras provide high­detail close­range information [19].
Underwater Visual­SLAM
7
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Depth Estimation
While active range sensors (e.g. LiDAR and time­of­flight cameras) directly sample the
3D geometry of a scene by emitting and measuring reflected light, conventional cameras
only capture intensity values in a 2D pixel array. An Red Green Blue (RGB) image, for
instance, is naturally represented as a tensor of shape H × W × 3, where H and W
denote image height and width, and the three channels encode red, green, and blue color
intensities.
To comprehend how depth can be extracted from 2D images, it is essential to first under­
stand the underlying principles of camera imaging. This section briefly covers the pinhole
camera model, lens distortion, and the geometric relationship between a pair of cameras
and the scene in view.
2.3.1
Camera fundamentals
The simplest and most fundamental model for a camera is the pinhole camera model.
In this ideal model, light rays from a scene pass through a single point (the pinhole) and
project an inverted image onto a sensor plane. The model describes how a point P w =
[xw, yw, zw] in a 3D scene is projected into a 2D pixel p = [u, v] in the image plane. This
projective transformation is governed by the camera intrinsics, i.e. the internal parameters
specific to a camera and lens combination. The camera intrinsic matrix K ∈R3×3 for the
ideal pinhole model includes the focal length as well as the center point in x and y, see
equation 2.9.
K =


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


(2.9)
The camera intrinsics can be determined by a process called camera calibration and is
constant as long as the focus remains unchanged. With the intrinsic parameters for a
camera we can describe the projective transformation from the real world to the image
plane as in equation 2.10:
sp = KT c
wP w
(2.10)
Where T c
w = [Rc
w|tc
w] is the transformation from the world to camera frame and s is the
projective transformation’s arbitrary scaling [20]. Figure 2.3 provides a visual brief of the
pinhole camera model.
The ideal pinhole camera model does not account for the camera lens, which introduces
distortion to the image. Since we rely on the underlying geometry of the pinhole model to
infer depth, we need to remove this distortion. This removal is referred to as undistortion
and is achieved by using the distortion coefficient, which model the lens’ warping effect.
The distortion coefficients are also found during camera calibration [21].
2.3.2
Stereo matching
There exist methods to derive depth information from images, particularly in systems with
stereo cameras. A widely used approach is stereo matching, which determines the hor­
izontal displacement between corresponding pixels in a pair of image frames. The key
idea is that, due to real­world geometry, pixels projecting points close to the camera exhibit
larger displacement than those projecting distant points. In literature the pixel displace­
ment is referred to as disparity. We note that for accurate disparity estimation, it is crucial
to establish correct pixel correspondences between the image pair.
By computing the disparity for every corresponding pixel, we obtain a disparity map d(u, v)
defined over the overlapping image domain (u, v) ∈IL ∩IR. Given knowledge of the real­
world geometry, this map can be converted into a metric depth map. In a stereo setup,
8
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: The pinhole camera model. This model describes the geometric relation be­
tween 3D points and their pixel projection in the image plane, which is governed by the
camera intrinsics [20]
one uses the camera intrinsics K together with the baseline b.
Z(u, v) =
f b
d(u, v)
(2.11)
Once the depth map is obtained, each pixel coordinate (u, v) can be back­projected to the
3D camera coordinate frame. Using the intrinsic calibration matrix K, the homogeneous
pixel coordinate

u, v, 1
T maps to


X
Y
Z

= Z K−1


u
v
1


(2.12)
2.3.3
Rectification
Given a pixel in one image, how can we compute the position of its correspondence in
the other image? In the case of stereo camera setups we can make use of the position
(baseline) and intrinsics for each camera to assist the matching.
When a 3D point is viewed by two cameras, a powerful geometric constraint known as
epipolar geometry arises. Consider a point pL in the left image and its corresponding
point pR in the right image. Due to the geometric constraint of the stereo setup PR is
constrained to lie on a specific line called the epipolar line. Then if we rectify (i.e. warp)
the images such that corresponding horizontal scanlines are epipolar lines, each pixel
correspondence can be found by searching horizontally across the image.
To rectify stereo images, first rotate the cameras such that they are looking perpendicular
to their baseline. The smallest rotation that achieves this transformation should be used.
Next rotate the cameras around their optical axis, such that the y­axis in the camera frame
is also perpendicular to the baseline. Lastly rotate the cameras such that their centers
Underwater Visual­SLAM
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Example of image rectification: (a) Original image pair overlaid with several
epipolar lines; (b) images transformed so that epipolar lines are parallel; (c) images rec­
tified so that epipolar lines are horizontal and in vertical correspondence; (d) final rectifi­
cation that minimizes horizontal distortions [21]
align. If the focal length of the cameras are different, then the images should be rescaled.
To avoid aliasing, upsample the smaller focal­length­image to the larger one’s scale [21].
The rectification process assumes that the images are distortion free. If that isn’t the case,
then the images must first be undistorted.
2.3.4
Correspondences
The main challenge in stereo matching is to determine the correct pixel correspondences.
We distinguish between sparse correspondences, which attempt to find correspondences
for just a limited set of pixels, and dense correspondences which attempt to find corre­
spondences for all pixels. Sparse correspondences are typically computed using image
features which can be quite robust and therefore provide a high certainty in the corre­
spondence matches. Sparse correspondences also typically require less computation
because, as the name implies, they have fewer matches to determine. In the case for
image­based rendering and modeling however, a large number of points are needed for
accurate reconstruction and therefore require the use of dense methods.
Dense correspondences are more challenging than sparse ones because determining
matches from textureless regions requires some guesswork. This means that dense cor­
respondences are challenging to obtain in marine environments where we expect many
textureless regions. Due to this challenge, recent techniques use deep learning to solve
the stereo matching problem. The way deep learning is applied to stereo matching ranges
from learning steps in the stereo pipeline (e.g. matching cost or optimization), to end­to­
end 3D reconstruction based on 2D image(s) [21].
Even with recent advancements, many of the best stereo matching algorithms use exten­
sive fine­tuning to achieve State Of The Art (SOTA) results. Given the zero­shot capability
shown in other domains of computer vision, this has motivated the development of foun­
dation models for stereo depth estimation that achieve strong zero­shot generalization
without per­domain fine­tuning, one of which, FoundationStereo, we will look into now
10
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Left: Samples from our FoundationStereo dataset (FSD), which consists of
synthetic stereo images with structured indoor / outdoor scenes (top), as well as more
randomized scenes with challenging flying objects and higher geometry and texture di­
versity (bottom). Right: The iterative self­curation process removes ambiguous samples
inevitably produced from the domain randomized synthetic data generation process. Ex­
ample ambiguities include severe texture repetition, ubiquitous reflections with limited sur­
rounding context, and pure color under improper lighting.
[22]
2.4
Foundation Stereo
FoundationStereo[22] developed by NVIDIA, is a SOTA foundational model in this cate­
gory. It has achieved 1st place on the world­wide Middlebury leaderboard and ETH3D
leaderboard. It has been designed for robust zero­shot stereo depth estimation, meaning
that it can generalize well to unseen real world scenarios without needing domain specific
fine­tuning. The authors show that the model is able to handle objects with challeng­
ing properties including (textureless / reflective / translucent / thin­structured) as well as
complex illuminations ­ properties which are especially present in under water maritime
environments.
Aside from the model itself the paper also contributes with a large scale stereo image pair
dataset of 1M synthetic images called Foundation Stereo Dataset (FSD). The dataset
uses techniques to ensure realism in the images and accounts for crucial stereo match­
ing challenges such as reflections, low texture surfaces and severe occlusions. FSD also
uses domain randomization, a technique that randomizes the rendering of the simulator
to transfer learning from simulation to the real world. The key idea is that with enough
variability in the simulator, the real world may appear as just a variation of the render­
ing configuration[23]. For the FSD this means varying camera parameters, lighting, and
object configurations for the synthetically generated images. The domain randomization
inevitably introduce ambiguous samples to the dataset which is why FSD also includes
a self­curation pipeline. The pipeline is to first train an initial model on the FSD and af­
terwards evaluate it to detect ambiguous samples. The ambiguous samples are then
regenerated, and the model is retrained. Figure 2.5 is from the FoundationStereo pa­
per[22] and shows a couple of sample images from the FSD dataset and the self­curation
pipeline
The architecture for FoundationStereo can be broadly divided into three stages:
1. Feature extraction
2. Cost Volume processing
3. Iterative Refinement
1. The feature extraction step combines the features from a large pre­trained depth model
Underwater Visual­SLAM
11
==PAGE:22==
(DepthAnythingV2 [24]), with those of a smaller Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
module (EdgeNeXt­S [25]). Specifically the DepthAnythingV2, which is trained on real
monocular images, is included to reduce the gap between simulation and real world that
occurs from training on synthetic data. At this step the model also extracts context fea­
tures directly from the left image which together with the concatenated features of the
DepthAnythingV2 and EdgeNeXt­S models help guide the later iterative refinement.
2. The concatenated features from the left and right images are combined to construct a
4D cost volume. This volume essentially maps out all candidate matches for each pixel
in one image across various disparities in the other image. Thereafter, the cost volume
is filtered to improve the reliability of potential depth matches and to incorporate broader
contextual information. The filtered cost volume is then used to predict an initial disparity.
3. The initial disparity is then iteratively refined to increase accuracy and sharpness. The
refinement helps the model avoid local optima and speeds up convergence. At each
iteration step, the current disparity is used to look up features from both the filtered cost
volume and the features extracted directly from the left image.
On GitHub the authors state that the input left and right image pairs for FoundationStereo
needs to be rectified and undistorted. Although the model has been trained on RGB
images and achieves the best results on those, the authors also state that they have
tested the model on monochrome and Infrared (IR) images, which the model works well
on too.
2.5
Point clouds
After computing a disparity map for an image, we can use it to project each image pixel
into a 3D point. Doing this for all pixels yields a collection of 3D points which we refer to
as a point cloud. During this step we usually inject the real world scale information (from
the baseline B), which ensures the point cloud, representing a reconstruction of a scene,
is in a metric scale.
2.5.1
Registration
Given a pair of point cloud reconstructions of overlapping scenes we are often interested
in determining the transformation between the point clouds ­ a technique known as reg­
istration ­ such that we can infer the motion between the scenes. The most widely used
3D registration technique is the ICP algorithm [21].
point­to­point ICP
Given a point cloud P which we want to align with point cloud Q we define the distance
between point p ∈P and Q as the distance between p and the closest point q ∈Q
d(p, Q) = min
q∈Q ∥q −p∥
(2.13)
The closest point in Q that yields the minimum distance is denoted as y. We define Y as
the set of closest points and let C be the closest point operator.
Y = C(P, Q)
(2.14)
The ICP algorithm consists of the following steps:
• Compute the closest points Y = C(P, Q)
• Use matched points mi ∈M to estimate the transformation P →Q
12
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:23==
• Apply transformation to point cloud P
• Repeat iteration until criterion is met (e.g. error falls below preset threshold τ)
In the case where we don’t expect the point cloud to have full overlap, i.e. a correspon­
dence pair for every point, we add a maximum matching threshold dmax, and ignore points
whose correspondence distances are greater than dmax [26]. The standard ICP which
uses distances between points is referred to as point­to­point ICP, and its optimization
step is summed up in equation 2.15
T ∗= argmin
T
X
i
||T · pi −mi||2
(2.15)
Point­to­plane ICP
The point­to­plane variant of ICP takes advantage of the surface normals ni on the point
cloud and penalizes only the component of the error along the surface normal. This variant
has been shown to converge faster and be more accurate on range scans and surfaces
[26]. The point­to­plane ICP can be summed up in equation 2.16
T ∗= argmin
T
X
i
||ni · (T·i −mi)||2
(2.16)
GICP
Generalized Iterative Closest Point (GICP) combines the point­to­point ICP and the point­
to­plane ICP algorithms into a single probabilistic framework, and therefore is a distribution­
to­distribution matching. The GICP algorithm models the surface from which a point was
sampled as a Gaussian distribution, so a point pi becomes:
pi ∼N(ˆpi, CP
i ),
(2.17)
Where ˆpi is the actual point and CP
i is the covariance matrix, which is typically estimated
from its k­nearest neighbors. The covariance matrix is regularized by replacing its eigen­
values with (1, 1, ϵ), which makes GICP work as a plane­to­plane ICP. ϵ is a small constant
representing the covariance along the normal. The authors of GICP define the transfor­
mation error as a distribution:
di ∼N(0, CP
i + TCQ
i T).
(2.18)
With the transformation error distribution they find the transformation T that maximizes
the log likelihood of di, see equation 2.19
T = argmax
T
X
i
log(p(di))
(2.19)
= argmin
T
X
i
dT
i (CB
i + TCA
i T)−1di.
(2.20)
VGICP
Although the ICP variant can achieve good results (especially GICP) they are highly de­
pendent on the quality of the correspondences found by the nearest neighbors search.
With regard to the compute time, this search often becomes the bottleneck and it cannot
Underwater Visual­SLAM
13
==PAGE:24==
be optimized on a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) because it makes heavy use of condi­
tional branching. VGICP addresses this issue by replacing the per­point nearest­neighbor
matching with a voxelized distribution aggregation. First VGICP defines the distance ˆd′
between ˆai and its neighbors:
ˆd′
i =
X
j
(ˆqj −T ˆpi)
(2.21)
This changes the distribution d′ to
ˆd′
i ∼(µdi, Cdi),
(2.22)
µdi =
X
j
(ˆqj −T ˆpi) = 0,
(2.23)
Cdi =
X
j
(CQ
j + TCP
i T).
(2.24)
and thereby the optimization to:
T = argmin
T
X
i

X
j
(qj −Tpi)


T 
X
j
(CQ
j + TCP
i T)T


−1 
X
j
(qj −Tpi)


(2.25)
2.6
SLAM
For a robot to operate safely and effectively in an unknown environment, it needs to form
an internal representation of its surroundings. An approach to this is to simultaneously
build a mapping of the robot’s surroundings, while simultaneously estimating the robot’s
pose w.r.t. that map. This problem is known as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM). A key aspect of SLAM is the use of loop closures for the trajectory estimation, to
reduce the odometry drift over time and ensure a globally consistent map. [8]
A SLAM typically consists of two blocks; the front­end and the back­end. The front­end
processes the sensor data and creates constraints, while the back­end optimizes the
constraints to solve the state estimation and mapping. To speed up the compute time
for a SLAM algorithm, the front­end typically creates an ”intermediate representation”
of the raw sensor data which are more compact and easier to describe mathematically,
e.g. using extracted features from an image in contrast to using all pixels. Methods that
pre­process sensor data to extract intermediate representations are known as indirect
methods, whereas methods that use the raw data are known as direct methods. Direct
methods are typically more accurate and robust compared to indirect methods, since they
make use of the entire sensory information. Direct methods are in turn more computation­
ally heavy compared to indirect methods, so when designing a SLAM algorithm a choice
in trade­off between accuracy and computation must be made. [8]
2.6.1
Factor graphs
A commonly used back­end representation for a SLAM problem is the graphical one,
specifically factor graphs. Factor graphs are bipartite graphs with vertices ϕi ∈U, edges
eij ∈E, and nodes xj ∈V, F = (U, E, V). vertices (circles) represent any variables or
set thereof e.g. sensor poses or landmarks and nodes (small squares) represent factors.
Each factor can be thought of as an equation involving the two variables which is con­
nected to by the edges. Pose­graph SLAM can be viewed as a special form of factor
graph in which variables (vertices) can only be robot poses [11]. Figure 2.6 shows the
visual representation of a factor graph with various factors and variables.
14
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.6: Example: Factor graph representation of a optimization problem with various
variable types (vertices) and factors (nodes) [27]
2.6.2
Range­based SLAM
Range­based SLAM types are algorithms which use range sensors (e.g. LiDAR, Red
Green Blue + Depth (RGB­D), Sound Navigation And Ranging (SONAR)) as their primary
sensor. For these SLAM types a single cycle of data collection is usually referred to as a
scan, owing to how a LiDAR ’scans’ its environment. A scan is effectively a set of points
or a point cloud. Range­based SLAM uses registration to compute the transformation
between scans from which the SLAM performs the odometry estimate [27] [28].
2.7
GLIM
GLIM is a tightly coupled 3D range­inertial localization and mapping framework. It is
designed to be sensor agnostic to the range data, meaning any 3D point cloud, whether
from a LiDAR scanner, RGB­D camera, stereo cameras and the like, can be used as
input. GLIM utilizes GPU­accelerated scan matching to enable real­time registration on
dense point clouds. The acceleration from the GPU also allows for a longer time window
for optimizing sensor poses, making the algorithm more accurate and robust to sensor
noise and degradation.
GLIM consists of the following blocks
• Odometry estimation
• Local mapping
• Global mapping
What separates GLIM from other range­inertial based SLAM algorithms is:
• GPU­accelerated scan matching
• Odometry estimation via fixed­lag smoothing and keyframe­based matching
• Global trajectory optimization by direct registration error minimization
GLIM consists of a pre­processing module and three estimation modules (odometry, Local
mapping and Global mapping) as seen in figure 2.7
2.7.1
Pre­processing
GLIM uses VGICP as the matching cost factor to register point clouds, and extends it with
surface­orientation based correspondence validation and a multi­resolution voxel map to
Underwater Visual­SLAM
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.7: The pre­processing and three estimation modules (odometry, local mapping
and global mapping) [9]
improve accuracy and stability. Given a point cloud P with points pk ∈P VGICP first
models each point as a gaussian distribution which represents the local shape of the
surface around pk. VGICP then creates L resolution levels of voxelmaps with resolution
rl = r02(l−1) and associates each input point pk with a corresponding voxel in each of the
resolution levels and computes the point­to­voxel distance. GLIM extends VGICP with a
simple correspondence validation based on the surface normals of nk of points pk ∈Pi
to check whether each point in Pi is visible from the viewpoint of the next point cloud P|.
This correspondence validation is employed to avoid the association of points on different
sides of the thin walls. The objective function to be minimized is the sum of distribution­
to­distribution distances between points pl
k = (µl
k, Cl
k) and their corresponding voxels
˜pl
k = (˜µl
k, ˜Cl
k):
ePC(Ti, Tj) =
X
l∈[1...L]
X
pk∈Pi
eD2D pk, ˜pl
k, T −1
i
Tj

,
(2.26)
eD2D pk, ˜pl
k, Tij

= dl T
k

˜Cl
k + Tij Ck T T
ij
−1
dl
k,
dl
k = Tij pk −˜pl
k,
Tij = T −1
i
Tj
(2.27)
GLIM implements an efficient linearization mechanism which only need two GPU­GPU
data transfer calls per factor graph linearization task, which minimizes synchronization
overhead and fully utilizes the power of a GPU.
GLIM uses the IMU preintegration techniques to incorporate IMU constraints into the factor
graph. The factor integrates the system evolution between two time steps i and j to obtain
the relative body motion. The error term is described as:
eIMU(xi, xj) =
log
 ∆RT
ijRT
i Rj
2 +
∆tij −RT
i

tj −ti −v∆tij −1
2g∆t2
ij

2
+
∆vij −RT
i (vj −vi −g∆tij)
2 .
(2.28)
2.7.2
Odometry estimation
The proposed odometry estimation method for GLIM employs a combination of fixed­lag
smoothing and keyframe based point cloud matching. Given an input point cloud, GLIM
first correct the distortion of the point cloud caused by sensor motion, based on the motion
prediction from the IMU. A factor graph is then constructed as shown in figure 2.8. The
factor distinguishes frames into three sets:
• Active frames X a which are the frames still in the optimization window
• Preceding frames X P
i
= [xi−Npre, ..., xi−1] which are the Npre latest frames
16
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.8: Odometry estimation factor graph from GLIM. The vertices (circles) contain
the sensor state xt = [Tt, vt, bt] and nodes (diamonds) contain the factors between vari­
ables. The last few frames are always included in the optimization. Variables within the
optimization window may not affect every factor directly but are still updated by the opti­
mizer. Frames outside the optimization window are not subject to optimization, although
keyframes may still be used in later optimizations [9]
• Key frames X K which are up to Nodom frames according to a keyframe selection
strategy
The active frames X a are the frames still in the optimization window, meaning that their
sensor pose is still being optimized by the fixed­lag smoothing. Once frames move out
of the optimization window, they become marginalized and are considered fixed. The
preceding frames X P
i
and keyframes X K are used for optimization and have a matching
cost factor inserted between them and the latest frame. GLIM defines the overlap rate
between two point clouds Pi and Pj as the fraction of points in Pi that fall within a voxel
of Pj. A new keyframe is created when a new frame has an overlap rate between it
and all keyframes below a certain threshold. GLIM removes redundant keyframes under
two circumstances: 1) when a keyframe’s overlap rate between it and the latest keyframe
falls below a certain threshold, and 2) if the number of keyframes exceeds Nodom, then the
keyframe is removed which heuristically maximizes the spatial distribution of all keyframes
according to following score:
s(i) = o(i, Nodom)
X
j∈[1,Nodom−1]\{i}
(1 −o(i, j))
(2.29)
where o(i, j) is the overlap rate between keyframe i and j.
The overall objective function for odometry estimation is:
gLIO(X a) =
X
xi∈X a
X
xj∈X P
i ∪X k
ePC(Pi, Pj, Ti, Tj)+
X
xi∈X a
eIMU(xi−1, xi)+eMG(X a), (2.30)
where eMG is the error term to compensate for the marginalized variables and factors.
2.7.3
Local mapping
The local mapping module in GLIM is responsible for building and refining submaps us­
ing the marginalized frames. As a frame becomes marginalized it is fed to GLIM’s local
mapping module. First GLIM re­performs deskewing and covariance estimation on the
frame. Then the overlap rate for the new frame and the latest frame in the submap is
Underwater Visual­SLAM
17
==PAGE:28==
determined. If the overlap rate is below a certain threshold, then the frame is added to the
submap factor graph. Marginalized frames are added to the submap until the number of
frames exceed a certain threshold, or the overlap rate between the first and last frame in
the submaps drops below a certain threshold. If either condition is met, then the frames
are merged into a single submap via batch optimization using the Levenberg–Marquardt
optimization algorithm. The submap factor graph has a matching cost factor between
all combinations of frames C2X s in X s, an IMU preintegration factor between consecutive
frames and a bias/velocity factor on each individual frame. An example of the factor graph
for both the global and submapping can be seen in figure 2.9. The total objective function
for the local mapping is:
gLM(X s) =
X
(xi,xj)∈C2X s
ePC(Ti, Tj) +
X
xi∈X s
eIMU(xi−1, xi) +
X
xi∈X s
eBV (xi),
eBV (xi) = ∥bi −b′
i∥2 + ∥vi −v′
i∥2
(2.31)
Where eBV is a prior factor to keep the velocity and IMU bias estimates close to the
marginalized state (v′
i and b′
i)
2.7.4
Global mapping
Whenever a new submap is created, the global mapping module incrementally updates
the global mapping. To retain information about the IMU bias, initial velocity and avoid
IMU drift during the global map optimization, GLIM introduces two states called endpoints.
Given an estimate of sensor states in a submap [x1, ..., xNsub] These states are the first
and last sensor states (x1andxNsub) of the submap and are denoted xi
L and xi
R. GLIM
also defines a submap origin T i = [Ri|ti] as the pose of the sensor at the middle of the
submap, TNsub/2. The submap origin is then use to determine the sensor state xt relative
to the submap origin as:
T ′
t = (T i)−1Tt,
v′
t = (Ri)−1vt,
b′
t = bt.
(2.32)
GLIM uses the submap origin T i and the sensor states xi
L and xi
R to create relative state
factors between the submap origin and it’s endpoints, such that they satisfy equation 2.33.
eEP
L (T i, xi
L) =
log
 T iT ′
1(T i)−12
+ ∥v′
1 −(Ri)T vi
L∥2 + ∥b′
1 −bi
L∥2,
eEP
R (T i, xi
R) =
log
 T iT ′
Nsub(T i)−12
+ ∥v′
Nsub −(Ri)T vi
R∥2 + ∥b′
Nsub −bi
R∥2.
(2.33)
In addition the relative state factors, a matching cost factor between all submaps with an
overlap rate greater than a small threshold is added, together with an IMU preintegration
factor between the sensor states xi
R and xi+1
L
of submaps xi and xi+1. An example of the
factor graph for both the global mapping and submapping can be seen in figure 2.9. This
yields the objective function for the global mapping module seen in equation 2.34
18
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.9: Global and Submapping module estimation factor graph from GLIM. The ver­
tices (circles) contain the sensor state xt = [Tt, vt, bt], the squares contain the submaps
and nodes (diamonds) contain the factors between variables. The local mapping module
produces a submap from the marginalized frames of the odometry module. The submaps
are then merged in the global mapping module. The global mapping uses the first and
last sensor states (xi
L, xi
R) to create IMU factors between the submaps [9]
gGM(X g) =
X
(T i,T j)∈X o
ePC(T i, T j)
+
X
T i∈X g
eIMU(xi−1
R , xi
L)
+
X
T i∈X g
 eEP
L (T i, xi
L) + eEP
R (T i, xi
R)

,
(2.34)
Where X g are all submaps and X o are all submaps with an overlap.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:31==
3
Methods
3.1
Setup
With the background in place, we can move from theory to practice. Before proposing a
solution however, we must consider the hardware available.
3.1.1
The ROV
The solution should be developed for use on the BlueROV2 [29], which in our case is
equipped with the heavy configuration [30]. The BlueROV2 Heavy can be seen in figure
3.1. The BlueROV2 Heavy is a tethered ROV, controllable in 6­DoF. The ROV is in the
smaller category, measuring (length x height x width) 457 mm x 338 mm x 254 mm and
weighing 11–12 kg. The ROV has a modular frame which means that, if the project ne­
cessitates it, we have the possibility to extend the frame to include additional sensors or
scanners. The BlueROV2 Heavy is for our use case controlled with a PlayStation 4 (con­
troller) (PS4) controller, and includes a depth hold setting, which when activated, controls
the ROV’s vertical velocity to 0, and the roll and pitch angles to 0. The battery is rated
to last 2 hours under normal use and can be easily swapped. These features mean that
the BlueROV2 Heavy is intuitive to control, and easy to keep stable to fixate on a given
target and thereby obtain good quality data. The limitation to be aware of with regards to
maneuverability is the tether. The length of the tether is 150m, so for our use cases, the
length will not be a limitation. The main limitation to consider for the tether is the possi­
bility of entanglement with the environment, and the possible obstruction it can cause on
sensors, e.g. the cameras. The path for the ROV should therefore be considered when
planning experiments.
Figure 3.1: The BlueROV2 Heavy. Dimensions: (length x height x width) 457 mm x 338
mm x 254 mm: weight 11–12 kg. The the payload is the transparent tube in the middle of
the ROV. Note: we use a flat port for the payload instead of the dome shape depicted in
the figure
3.1.2
Sensors
The ROV is equipped with 3 specific sensors which we will make use of: 1) a stereo
Camera namely the OAK­D Lite[31], 2) an integrated IMU as part of the Pixhawk 1 Flight
Controller[32] and 3) a pressure sensor MS5837­30BA[33].
Messages from the flight controller and the pressure sensor are published through MAVROS,
a Robot Operating System (ROS) package which acts as a bridge between MAVLink de­
vices, (e.g., the Pixhawk 1), and the ROS computer[34]. This has the advantage of en­
suring that the sensor messages are published according to standard conventions as well
Underwater Visual­SLAM
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.2: Example of the effect of Rolling shutter vs global shutter. With rolling shutter,
pixel columns are captured sequentially which can cause distortions if parts of the image
are moving faster than the shutter, e.g. the blade of the fan in this example. Global
shutter records all pixels at the same time so it doesn’t exhibit the same distortion on
moving objects
as allowing us to control the publish rates of sensors.While the depth sensor accuracy is
listed in the datasheet as 2mm in water, the accuracy of the integrated IMU on the flight
controller is difficult to state. The reason is that the flight controller uses a navigational
filter (PX4) to fuse multiple sensors to improve the IMU measurement [35]. Therefore we
must calibrate and estimate its reliability manually later.
The OAK­D lite is set up to capture two stereo monochrome images of resolution 640x480
as well as a single RGB image of resolution 1920x1080 which are published through ROS
at 30Hz. The stereo images are taken with a global shutter (all pixels are captured at the
same time), while the RGB image is captured with rolling shutter (one pixel column at a
time)[36], see an example in figure 3.2.
3.2
Constraints
To guide us in choosing a SLAM algorithm to base our solution on, we analyze the problem
at hand and create some constraints:
• Algorithm type: Must be Visual­Inertial since multi modality greatly increases ro­
bustness under water. Furthermore it would be very beneficial to have the capability
to easily include additional sensory inputs, to leverage the strengths of the various
sensing modalities under water highlighted in 2.2
• Map density: For surveillance we want something which is spatially accurate and
rich in detail. Therefore we consider dense methods only
• Robustness to noise: The algorithm must be robust to noise in the input as we
anticipate bad image quality due to the difficult optical conditions under water.
• Open source / implementability: To ease the implementation process and ensure
extensibility for others we consider algorithms which are open source, and have
their implementations made available for use.
• Visual degradation handling: The algorithm must also be able to handle momen­
tary degradation of the visual sensors, that are likely to arise due to visual dropouts
in the marine environment. This could be from stirred up suspended particles or
momentary loss of objects within the Field Of View (FOV).
22
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:33==
• Real­time capability: For future prospects we want something which has the pos­
sibility to work in real time as this can facilitate a quick reaction time with regards to
surveillance.
3.3
Proposed method
With the constraints set, we propose to base the solution around the use of the SLAM
algorithm GLIM [9]. The following listing explains how GLIM satisfies the constraints:
• Range–inertial / multi­modality: GLIM is Range­Inertial SLAM, which is sensor
agnostic to the range sensor used to generate its point cloud input. This means that
it can accept depth inferred from stereo matching, which would make it a Visual­
inertial SLAM algorithm. GLIM facilitates multi­modality both tightly — by directly
fusing point clouds from range sensors — and loosely — by utilizing a factor­graph
backend to integrate additional measurements and constraints
• Dense maps: GLIM builds maps from dense point clouds, meeting our requirement
for detail­rich reconstructions. Furthermore, GLIM can be extended with a coloriza­
tion module to the point cloud mapping using images.
• Robust registration: The algorithm uses VGICP, a distribution­to­distribution regis­
tration method, which inherently tolerates noise better than point­to­point approaches.
• Extensibility and implementation: Use of GLIM is well documented by the au­
thors, both by a detailed scientific paper, and documentation page with instructions
on how to install, use and extend the software. The code is open source and avail­
able on GitHub.
• Handling visual degradation: GLIM uses a frame­to­model matching with a long
optimization window, (adjustable and in the order of seconds) which means that it
can tolerate a few seconds of completely degenerate point clouds.
• Real­time potential: GLIM is designed to utilize GPU acceleration to perform SLAM
in real time.
To use GLIM as a visual SLAM, we need to transform the stereo images captured by
our camera sensor, to a point cloud. As shown earlier this can be done by using stereo
matching to compute disparity, and then using the baseline and camera intrinsics to con­
vert the disparity into depth to project the pixels (u, v) into the camera frame (X, Y, Z). As
previously mentioned there exist many algorithms for stereo matching, so we need to set
some criteria for determining the right one.
The most important criterion for the stereo matching technique is the consistency of the
point clouds that are generated. By consistency we mean the similarity between recon­
structions of the same objects and scenes between frames, e.g. walls have the same
normals and objects have same geometry. If we reconstruct the scenes too dissimilarly,
VGICP will not be able to find correct correspondences. This is because VGICP is a direct
registration technique, meaning that it makes use of all points, in contrast to only robust
points or features. At the same time, VGICP can tolerate different levels of noise in the
scene reconstruction due to it being a distribution­to­distribution matching, so some noise
in the stereo matching algorithm can be tolerated.
The authors of GLIM demonstrate a consistent mapping result with the use of a passive
stereo camera (StereoLabs ZED 2i [37]). However, the mapping is severely distorted due
to the large distortion in the input point clouds. See figure 3.3 for the mapping results
Underwater Visual­SLAM
23
==PAGE:34==
obtained from different sensors by GLIM. This tells us that the distortion in the mapping
will be directly affected by the distortion in the reconstructions, which will degrade the fine
details in the mapping.
Figure 3.3: Different Mapping results from various sensors obtained by GLIM [9]. The
experimental environment is seen in the right corner, and the results from the passive
stereo matching sensor (Stereolabs ZED2i) is highlighted by a red border. We say that
the mapping is consistent because the walls are correctly aligned, but the map is severely
distorted due to the distorted input point clouds.
If we choose a learning­based approach we need to consider the limited availability of
underwater datasets. Therefore we ideally want a model which is pretrained on an un­
derwater dataset or has strong generalization capabilities across domains (zero­shot ca­
pability).
With these considerations in mind we choose to use the neural network model: Founda­
tionStereo [22]. We note that other approaches exist both classical and learning­based,
which also could provide good results, but for the sake of demonstrating a proof of con­
cept, ease of implementation and SOTA accuracy together with pre­trained weights and
zero­shot capability, we consider FoundationStereo the best option.
FoundationStereo (and most other stereo matching techniques) requires rectified and
undistorted images, which means that we need to obtain the camera intrinsics and create
a script to rectify and undistort the stereo images. We also need the camera intrinsics to
convert the disparity (pixels) to depth (m) and thereafter transform the individual pixels
(u, v) to (X, Y, Z)m.
The final pipeline for the proposed solution can be seen in figure 3.4.
24
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.4: Proposed System from image data capture to trajectory and mapping. The
pipeline has three steps. The data acquisition, the point cloud generation, and the SLAM.
The Blue outline with the docker logo indicates which steps are implemented inside the
container. The dotted outline shows which processes are carried out in real time (green)
and which aren’t (red)
3.4
Data
Before we can start implementing the solution we need to obtain some data to use it on.
The authors of GLIM provide sample test data in the ros2 bag file format [38]. This can
be used to validate that the implementation has been installed correctly. The sample data
includes accurate LiDAR and IMU measurements in an outdoor scene with many rich
geometric features (buildings, trees, lamp posts), so it demonstrates the easiest case for
GLIM to solve. It is expected that the accuracy and quality of the point clouds that can
be produced from a stereo pair of low resolution images in an underwater scene, is much
less than that of a high­end LiDAR measurement unit on land, so we cannot expect the
same performance as the test data. figure 3.5 shows the SLAM result viewed in GLIM’s
offline viewer. We will use the images from this viewer for the remainder of the report and
therefore advise the reader to take a look at the figure to build an understanding for the
visualization method.
After verifying that GLIM has been installed correctly we want to move on to data from
the actual domain, under water. Ideally we would find an underwater dataset online with
point clouds and IMU measurements, and a ground truth to compare against. With this
we would have been able to verify GLIM in the under water domain, separately from our
own point cloud reconstructions. In the case of unexpected results, the search for the root
cause could be narrowed to GLIM itself.
We were however not able to find a dataset with precomputed point clouds, so instead
we look for a dataset with stereo imagery, and instead test the entire system on simulta­
neously. We ended up using the data from an experimental campaign from Skovshoved
Havn. The advantage of this dataset was that it was obtained using the BlueROV2 Heavy
with the OAK­D lite camera, so it mimics our physical setup. Furthermore, it was captured
Underwater Visual­SLAM
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.5: SLAM result on the test data provided by the authors of GLIM. The figure
shows the trajectory of the sensor (green line) and orientation estimates along it according
to the East North Up (ENU)­convention. The points are the accumulated point clouds,
which together makes up the mapping. The points are colored according to the z­value.
A faint gray grid is shown in the middle of the viewer. This grid corresponds to the z = 0
plane which is determined during the initialization of GLIM.
at a real harbor, so it includes images of real marine infrastructure. The data is captured
as a 20min long ROS bag, with the relevant ROS topics being:
• /oak_d_lite/left/image_mono/h265: H.265 encoded monochrome image from the
left camera of the OAK­D Lite.
• /oak_d_lite/left/camera_info: Camera intrinsics and baseline for the left camera of
the OAK­D Lite.
• /oak_d_lite/rgb/image_color/h265: H.265 encoded color image from the RGB cam­
era of the OAK­D Lite.
• /oak_d_lite/right/image_mono/h265: H.265 encoded monochrome image from the
right camera of the OAK­D Lite.
• /oak_d_lite/right/camera_info: Camera intrinsics and baseline parameters for the
right camera of the OAK­D Lite.
• /bluerov2/mavros/imu/data: IMU data from the Pixhawk 1
26
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:37==
• /bluerov2/mavros/global_position/rel_alt: Relative altitude data from the depth sen­
sor
We want to start with a task as simple as possible for GLIM to solve. Therefore we chose
a 30 second sequence from Skovshoved Havn, where the ROV is performing a descent
following by an ascent, while keeping an almost fixed orientation to view the feature rich
ladder and wooden beam. We chose this sequence as there are both plenty of visual
features available for the stereo correspondences as well as geometric features for reg­
istration. We will refer to the chosen sequence as the ladder sequence, an example can
be seen in 3.6. This sequence will serve as the starting point for adapting our solution to
the under water domain.
Figure 3.6: 6 images from the from the ladder sequence showing the environment ob­
served by the ROV during its ascent and descent. The images are overlapping and fully
cover the visual information during the sequence. The images are captured by the left
camera of the OAK­D Lite
The dataset was originally thought to include a position reference from an Short­Baseline
acoustic positioning (SBL) (SBL) measurement, but it turned out to be too unreliable. As
a work around, we instead used the depth sensor as a positional reference. Though this
means that we can only compare the z­axis, it still provides valuable insight since the
sequence we chose the ROV is mainly moving up and down.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
27
==PAGE:38==
3.5
GLIM settings
Although the authors of GLIM demonstrate its use with stereo cameras, the algorithm
has been developed for LiDARs, so right away we need to disable the LiDAR specific
features.
LiDARs often include per­point timestamps which GLIM uses together with
the IMU measurements to deskew the point clouds. In contrast to LiDARs, global shut­
ter cameras (like the one we use) captures all pixel at the same point in time, render­
ing deskewing unnecessary[9]. To disable per­point timestamps and deskewing we set
"global_shutter_lidar": true. Ignoring this parameter will cause glim to automati­
cally assume a scan duration of the input point clouds, based on the average difference
between their timestamps, and then erroneously perform deskewing based on that range.
Another important parameter to specify is the transformation from the IMU frame into the
stereo camera frame:
T IMU
Camera = [R|t]
(3.1)
The translation can simply be measured on the BlueROV2 following the ENU conven­
tion[39] [x, y, z] = [0.04, −0.06, 0.0] in units of meters. To determine the rotation we first
note which orientation convention is used. The IMU data is converted through mavros and
has a positive value of gravity when standing still, so it must use the ENU convention[40].
The camera follows the pinhole camera model, so right, down, forward.
Camera Frame
ENU IMU Frame
X
Right
East
Y
Down
North
Z
Forward
Up
Table 3.1: Axis mappings between the Camera Frame and ENU IMU Frame
So the rotation needs to match the axes accordingly:
• IMU X (East) →Camera X (Right)
• IMU Y (North) →Camera Z (Forward)
• IMU Z (Up) →Camera ­Y (Down)
Or, described as rotation matrix:
R =


1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
1
0


(3.2)
Combining the rotation matrix with translation vector we get the full homogeneous matrix
describing the transformation:
Tcamera_imu =


1
0
0
0.04
0
0
−1
−0.06
0
1
0
0.0
0
0
0
1


(3.3)
T_camera_imu described as a quaternion is then
q = [0.04, −0.06, 0.0, 0.7071068, 0.0, 0.0, 0.7071068]
28
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:39==
GLIM emphasizes the importance of synchronization between the clocks of the IMU and
point cloud streams [9]. In practice, the timestamp you get from a ROS bag message
reflects the time of arrival of the message at the ROS master, which can differ significantly
from the instant the sensor actually recorded the measurement. To avoid introducing
that buffering into GLIM’s pipeline, we instead use each message’s header.stamp ­ the
hardware timestamp assigned by the sensor driver at capture[41].
To give GLIM a measure of our IMU’s confidence, we must specify four noise parameters:
the accelerometer white­noise density, the gyroscope white­noise density, the IMU bias
random­walk noise, and the integration noise. These values should come from the IMU
manufacturer’s datasheet or be calibrated from a still standing data sequence.
By contrast, GLIM does not expose a single ”Point cloud noise” parameter. Instead, in its
VGICP front end each incoming scan point is modeled as a Gaussian whose covariance
is estimated from the local neighborhood. Dense regions yield small covariances (high
confidence) while sparse or noisy regions yield large covariances (low confidence).
To pick a correct base voxel resolution r0 we start with the recommended voxel size for
indoor environments of 0.25. Later on we decrease the voxel base size until we observe
that the matching finds the right correspondences.
Important parameters for the implementation Note that even though we are using cam­
eras as our ranging device, the authors of GLIM chose to name the parameters as if the
range sensor was a LiDAR. This is just a naming scheme, but is stated to avoid confusion.
• "global_shutter_lidar": true
• "T_lidar_imu": [0.06, -0.04, 0.0, 0.7071068, 0.0, 0.0, 0.7071068]
• ”sensor”:
– "imu_acc_noise": 0.02268
– "imu_gyro_noise": 0.02171
– "imu_int_noise": 0.02171
– "imu_bias_noise": 0.04468
• "voxel_resolution": 0.25
3.6
Domain adaptation
With the data sequence determined and GLIM configured to our physical setup, we can
start applying the solution. First we inspect the point clouds generated; see figure 3.7. We
observe the point clouds to be visually consistent with the real world, and incredibly rich in
detail. Right away we note that there are two noticeable problems with the point clouds:
1) noisy points at the edges of objects, and 2) that the open water has been reconstructed
as a surface. We don’t expect the noisy points to affect the trajectory, but they will pollute
the mapping, so later we choose to remove points by using open3d’s [42] radius outlier
rejection. The open water surfaces are however a bit more problematic, because if they
contain a significant portion of the points in the point cloud, they will heavily weigh the
matching. Furthermore, since the surfaces are hallucinations, meaning that they have no
real meaning, we have no guarantee of them being produced equally from frame to frame.
This means that the VGICP will make use of correspondences with no real meaning.
To examine the impact that the open water surfaces have we first create a script to count
the number of points Nplane that the open water surface consists of and then determine
Underwater Visual­SLAM
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.7: Example: detail rich point clouds generated from a specific frame of the lad­
der sequence. Upper left shows the full hd color image from the OAK­D lite camera and
the other three shows the point clouds reconstruction in the order: top view, front view,
and diagonal side view. Notice that 1) the reconstruction shows noisy points at the bor­
ders between objects at different distances, and 2) that the open water segments are
reconstructed as surfaces
how large the percentage rplane of the total points Npc within the point cloud that it ac­
counts:
rplane = Nplane
Npc
· 100%
(3.4)
To count the inlier points on the plane we use Open3D’s plane segmentation method [43].
By using this method we assume that the open water segments are always reconstructed
as a planar surface, however the surfaces can also sometimes be more complex than this,
so the result of this examination should be used only as clue towards the influence of the
inlier points. An example of a plane segmentation can be seen in figure 3.8. The method
finds the plane with the largest support in the point cloud where inliers to the plane are
determined by a distance to plane threshold, which we set to 0.03 in our experiment. We
then calculate the average percentage of plane inlier points rplane for all N point clouds in
the entire sequence:
mean(rplane) = 1
N
N
X
i=0
rplane[i]
(3.5)
With this we determine the average percentage of plane inliers to be 33%, which is large
enough to have a significant influence on the registration. Due to the harsh assumption
of the open water surfaces being planer, the segmentation method misses significant
parts of the surfaces. The method also doesn’t handle cases where there are multiple
separated segments with background surfaces. This means that the actual percentage of
open surface points is larger than what we find. Though we don’t have the exact estimate
of the plane percentage, we can still assert that the influence is significant and that we
therefore need to expand our system to remove those points.
30
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.8: Example plane detection using open3d’s plane segmentation method [43] on
a reconstruction from the ladder sequence. We perform the plane detection on the entire
sequence of images, and calculate the average plane inlier point ratio: Nplane/Npc for all
point clouds in the sequence to be 33%
3.6.1
Openwater segmentation and removal
To remove the open water surfaces we first need a way to detect them. The detection can
either be done prior to point cloud generation e.g. through segmentation, or afterwards
by geometric constraints. Since we already have the generated point clouds, it would
be preferable to remove the planes by a geometric constraint. Therefore we investigate
whether we can find a geometric pattern, to create a heuristic from. Let’s consider figure
3.9 which shows a range of examples of how the open water surfaces are reconstructed.
The immediate idea is to filter the point clouds according to their distance from the camera,
but as we see in figure 3.9 the surfaces can appear closer than some of the actual objects.
Furthermore, we also see that the surfaces sometimes merge with the objects (e.g. the
ladder in upper left corner), which further makes defining a distance threshold difficult.
In the lower left example in the figure we see an example of the open water segments
being reconstructed as a curved surface, which demonstrates exactly why we aren’t able
to segment the surfaces as simple planes.
Due to the unpredictable manner in which the open water segments affect the reconstruc­
tion we conclude that a geometric constraint might end up becoming unreliable, especially
later if we encounter new examples different from those in figure 3.9. Therefore we in­
stead change direction and investigate whether using the raw images provides a more
reliable input to base a heuristic on. We chose to tackle it as a semantic segmentation
problem [44] ­ the problem of associating each pixel with a class label. In our case we are
interested in classifying pixels as either ’open water’ or ’not open water’. We separate the
problem into two steps: 1) segmentation, and 2) classification based on the segments.
We note that accidentally removing parts of real objects is not catastrophic so long as
enough geometric features remain for the VGICP to reliably match against. As the SLAM
Underwater Visual­SLAM
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.9: Examples of how the open water surfaces appear in the point clouds recon­
struction of the ladder sequence. The coordinate frame shows the camera pose (North
East Down (NED)). Due to the variety in where and how the surfaces are reconstructed it
is difficult to determine a geometric pattern for creating a constraint for filtering
mapping accumulates point clouds, regions that were mistakenly removed in one frame
can often be recovered from later views. By contrast, overly conservative filtering that
fails to remove open water regions lets false points accumulate in the mapping; these
false measurements add up over time and eventually corrupt the reconstructed surface,
producing an unusable model. For this reason we prefer a slight tendency to over­remove
ambiguous areas while maintaining enough inlier structure for registration.
Segmentation
First we need a method to segment the image. We chose to go with Facebook’s Seg­
ment Anything Model (image segmentation foundation model) (SAM) [45].
SAM is a
promptable, class­agnostic image segmentation foundation model that produces seg­
mentation masks from simple prompts ­ points or boxes. SAM was trained on the large
scale dataset SA­1B of 1B masks and 11M images to achieve strong zero­shot gener­
alization. The authors provide an implementation of SAM as a python package, which
can be cloned from GitHub at [46]. From the python package we will make use of the
SamAutomaticMaskGenerator class, which creates a grid of points on an image, and uses
those points to prompt SAM to generate masks for the entire image. Figure 3.10 shows
some examples of masks generations on on images from the ladder sequence.
The reader might wonder why we chose not to use Facebook’s proposed SAM succes­
sor, Segment Anything Model 2 (successor to SAM) (SAM2), which is both faster, lighter
and is stated to include all the capabilities of SAM. The reason is that in our tests SAM2
completely failed to generate segments for the underwater scenes in our data, whereas
SAM worked as expected. In the issues section of the SAM2 GitHub [47] multiple people
reported degraded masks when using SAM2 for static image mask generation on low res­
olution images, whereas SAM would work as expected. Since we are also dealing with
low resolution images, it could likely be the same issue. Figure 3.11 shows the difference
32
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.10: Segmentation mask generated using SAM on the rectified left images from
the ladder sequence. SAM produces high level segments for the image (background or
object) and also fine segments for parts of objects, although these looks to be unreliable
of the segmentation outputs of both SAM and SAM2 on the same image. By lowering
the stability score and IoU threshold as suggested in the issue [48], we are able to ob­
tain a lot more masks as seen in figure 3.11c, however the segmentation mask now also
become much more noisy at the edges. Due to the difficulties experienced with SAM2
we choose to go with the original SAM model, but we do note that it might be possible
to obtain equally good segmentation with SAM2 given the right set of parameters for the
mask generator.
(a)
Segmentation
masks
produced by SAM (default
params)
(b)
Segmentation
masks
produced by SAM2 (default
params)
(c) Segmentation masks pro­
duced by SAM2 w. parame­
ter tuning
Figure 3.11: Comparison of segmentation prediction from SAM (left) and SAM2 (middle
and right). With the default parameters SAM2 fails to segment the entire image, while
SAM succeeds. (right) shows the output of SAM2 after finetuning the mask generation,
where it generates segemnts for almost the entire image, however the segments now also
shows unexpected noise at the borders of the masks
Underwater Visual­SLAM
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.12: Example showing the SAM segmentation output and the individual masks.
The masks are plotted individually to enable the manual labeling of them into open water
or not open water. For this image we for example create a label array: is_openwater =
[0,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,1,1]
Detection
After segmenting the image we want to detect which of the segments belong to open
water, and which don’t. First, we note that the open water segments are visually very
distinctive. They are nearly textureless, so our intuition tells us that we might be able to
distinguish them by their edge count. To investigate this we chose an image with clear
open water and object segments. We then compute segmentation masks with SAM on
the image and manually label the masks as open water or not open water, see figure 3.12.
To reduce the labeling labor we chose to only label the segments with areas larger than
1000 pixels. Afterwards we determine the edges within the labeled segments, and report
their nedges/maskarea ratio. The resulting edge/area ratio for the first 15 masks in figure
3.12 can be seen below:
mask 0 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 35830 edge/area=0.179335
mask 1 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 285 edge/area=0.003078
mask 2 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 275 edge/area=0.002973
mask 3 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 13 edge/area=0.001185
mask 4 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 135 edge/area=0.025622
mask 5 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 89 edge/area=0.036341
mask 6 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 579 edge/area=0.265110
mask 7 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 234 edge/area=0.108888
mask 8 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 401 edge/area=0.189867
mask 9 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 646 edge/area=0.330943
mask 10 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 214 edge/area=0.135186
mask 11 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 138 edge/area=0.122340
mask 12 (open water=0): Number of edges in mask 108 edge/area=0.097122
mask 13 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 123 edge/area=0.115385
mask 14 (open water=1): Number of edges in mask 80 edge/area=0.076923
Avg edges ratio for open water=0.051479, Avg edges ratio for not open water=0.166243
34
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:45==
Sometimes the segmentation mask of open water can overlap slightly with actual objects,
which can cause a large increase in the edge­area ratio, due to the edge between the
open water and object segment being added to the count. To avoid this, we therefore
erode the segmentation masks and then use the eroded mask only for counting edges.
On the other hand, the area of segmentation masks can also sometimes be too small,
which adds floating line artifacts, to the point cloud. To fix this issue we therefore dilate
detected open­water masks to increase their overlap.
(a) Point cloud using non­dilated masks
(b) Point cloud using dilated masks
Figure 3.13: Example of masked point cloud generation where right is using dilated masks
and left isn’t. Not using dilated masks can cause floating lines artifacts like the one high­
lighted by a red boarder in the left figure.
We observe that the large segments are reliable in their edge­area ratio and that small
segments are not. Since small segments contribute less, due to their smaller size, we can
keep it simple and ignore the masks whose area is below a certain threshold. We chose
the threshold from the point at which we observe the edge/area ratio to become unreliable.
Again we note that we don’t need to be conservative with the tuning here either. Figure
3.14 provides an example of the processing steps for the open water surface removal.
The final algorithm in pseudo code can be seen in 1, and the complete system with the
open water surface removal can be seen in figure 3.16:
To see the effect removing the open water surfaces has on the SLAM estimate we per­
form two SLAM sessions on the ladder sequence. One without the open water surfaces
removed, and one with. The result can be seen in figure 3.15. Without the surfaces
removed we see that GLIM completely fails. The trajectory doesn’t correspond to the up­
/down motion which we expect, and the point clouds are completely misaligned. With the
surfaces removed, however, GLIM estimates the trajectory to have motion mainly in the
z­axis and produces a mapping in which the input point clouds have been added along
the same vertical line. In other words, a consistent estimate starts to emerge. Still, there
seems to be a lot of noise in the trajectory and mapping so therefore we move on to
tweaking some of the parameters to see if we can better the accuracy.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.14: processing steps for the open water surface removal. Starting from the orig­
inal image, the SAM masks and the edges are extracted, then the edges and masks are
overlaid to compute the edges/area­ratio for each mask ­ masks with edge/area ratio be­
low the chosen threshold is determined to be open water. The masks are filtered accord­
ing to area such that small unreliable masks are discarded. The resulting segmentation
for open water is depicted in the last image (lower right)
Algorithm 1 Open water mask generation
Require: Image I, SAM mask generator SAM, parameters Amin, τ, ke, kd
M ←SAM.generate(I)
E ←CannyEdges(I)
Mo ←∅
for all M ∈M do
a ←area(M)
if a < Amin then
continue
end if
Me ←erode(M, ke)
n ←P
p E(p) · Me(p)
ae ←area(Me)
r ←n/ max(1, ae)
if r < τ then
Md ←dilate(M, kd)
Mo ←Mo ∪{Md}
end if
end for
return Mo
36
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:47==
(a) w/o open water surfaces removed
(b) w. open water surface removed
Figure 3.15: Comparison of GLIM results on a point cloud input with and without open
water surfaces removed. Without the surfaces removed GLIM completely fails. With the
surfaces removed however we see an estimated trajectory (green line) of going up and
down as well as a mapping in which the input point clouds have been added in the same
area. In other words, a consistent estimate start to emerge
3.7
Final implementation
We now lower the voxel size mentioned earlier until we see the matching produce the
right correspondences. We obtained the best results at a voxel size of 0.05. We then
perform another SLAM with GLIM and assess the results. This time we go beyond the
qualitative assessment and also try to compare the z­axis of the trajectory estimate to the
depth sensor’s reading. The results of the trajectory and mapping can be seen in figures
3.17 and 3.18.
The goal in regards to localization from of the domain adaptation was to obtain a trajectory
that shows the correct movement trend in the ladder sequence: the ROV moving up and
down, with minor lateral movement. Considering figure 3.18 (the green line) we see that
GLIM estimates exactly that. The trajectory shows that the ROV did a short descent, then
moved slightly in the North direction while shaking a bit, and then performed an ascent. If
we consider figure 3.17 we see that the trajectory estimate from GLIM indeed reflects the
distinctive changes in the z­velocity. However, we also see from the scale of the trajectory,
that our system underestimates the motion of the ROV. By scaling the trajectory with a
factor of 3.25 we get a very close ­ although noisy ­ overlap of the GLIM z­position with the
depth sensor. This tells us that the trajectory does reflect real movement, but also that
there is a scaling error introduced somewhere in our system ­ at least in the z­axis.
The goal in regards to the mapping was to obtain a mapping which could reflect the real
world ladder and beam which we saw in figure 3.6. Considering figure 3.18 we might
initially think that GLIM just produced a random blob of points. However, if we consider it
more carefully, we can actually make out the sides of the ladder at the top of the mapping,
as well as a beam at the bottom. The middle of the mapping, however, seems to be heavily
cluttered. This phenomenon could be explained by the fact that GLIM continuously adds
point clouds to the mapping, overlapping points from the same objects on top of each
other many times. If those points are overlaid slightly wrong (e.g. due to noise in the
generated point clouds or pose estimate), then that noise will accumulate as more and
more overlapping frames are added, making the total mapping blurry. This could be the
Underwater Visual­SLAM
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.16: Final system from image data capture to trajectory and mapping. This ver­
sion is with open water mask removal. The pipeline has three steps. The data acquisition,
the point cloud generation, and the SLAM. The Blue outline with the docker logo indicates
which steps are implemented inside the container. The dotted outline shows which pro­
cesses are carried out in real time (green) and which aren’t (red)
reason why we are seeing features at the top and bottom of the generated mapping, areas
that are only observed from the ROV a few times, whereas the middle of the mapping is
observed through most of the sequence, and therefore very like to have had a noisy point
clouds added to it. Because we can’t know for certain whether it is the pose estimation,
the point clouds or both that is the root cause for the blurry mapping, the correct approach
to cleaning the mapping is difficult to state without getting more qualitative results. So
although we ideally would have liked to see a cleaner mapping, we now conclude the
domain adaptation and move on to a more controlled setup before fine­tuning.
3.7.1
Conclusion on domain adaptation
What we have achieved in this experiment was to verify the qualitative ability of our pro­
posed system to perform SLAM in a real, although simple, underwater environment. To
dive deeper into the quantitative performance of the system to both understand and eval­
uate it better, we need better references to the real world to compare to. Recall that the
ladder sequence only has depth as a reliable reference. Therefore, in the next section we
set up a controlled environment to run a series of tests that produce quantitative results
to guide parameter fine­tuning and give a more thorough understanding of the system.
38
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.17: Skovshoved trajectory (z only) after domain adaptation. We also plot a scaled
version of GLIM’s trajectory to highlight that the trend in movement on the ROV is cap­
tured. The dashed red lines indicate points at which the z­velocity of the ROV changed
distinctively. At these instances we also note that the trajectory produced by GLIM is
equally affected
Figure 3.18: Mapping and trajectory (green line) of the ladder sequence obtained at
Skovshoved Havn after domain adaptation. GLIM’s trajectory estimate shows that the
ROV did a short descent, then moved slightly in the North direction while shaking a bit,
and then performed an ascent, which is consistent with the motion we expect. The map­
ping is significantly blurry, especially in middle, however we are able to make out features
from the ladder sequence at the top and bottom of the mapping. The figure shows which
areas exactly match of with parts of the images from the ladder sequence.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:51==
4
Results
4.1
ASTA Pool
The experiments will be conducted in the test facility Autonomous Systems Test Arena
(DTU test facility) (ASTA). In area 3 of ASTA is a pool with dimensions 6.5 x 3.5 x 3m
pool, as well as a motions capture system above it, referred to as the Optitrack. Figure
4.1 shows the facilities of ASTA. By placing small retroreflective markers on objects within
the Optitrack, their pose can be accurately tracked and recorded in real time. The software
for the Optitrack produces the recording as a Comma­Separated Values (tabular data file
format) (CSV) file where each entry consists of frame index, time in seconds after the start
of the recording and the concatenated poses of all rigid bodies in the recording. The pose
format is specified in the Optitrack frame and consists of the 4 quaternions components
for orientation and the 3 xyz­coordinates for position:
poseoptitrack = [qx, qy, qz, qw, x, y, z]
(4.1)
The markers must not be obstructed, so to allow the ROV to dive in the pool, the markers
have to be extended from the ROV up above the water surface. When processing the
data, the true position of the ROV and milk crate can be obtained by translating the position
of the marker along the arm to the ROV and milk crate respectively.
p = pmarker −Rmarkera
(4.2)
where a = [0, 0, L]T
Extending the markers doesn’t come without challenges, however, as the added mass
will shift the center of mass of the ROV, affecting the dynamics and making the position
more unstable. Additionally, noise in the orientation measurement from the Optitrack will
be amplified in relation to the arm length, making the position estimate more sensitive to
noise. For these reasons, the AMR group uses an arm of length 1m which we will borrow
for the experiments.
Figure 4.1: The areas of ASTA. The pool and Optitrack (black frame) is in area 3.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.2: The ASTA pool with added objects in it to increase the geometric features.
The milk crate can be seen suspended from a wooden plank at the back center of the
pool. The objects are added in the end of the pool where the crate is situated, since that
end will make up most of the scenes viewed by the ROV
4.1.1
Setup
The goal of the experiments is to obtain quantitative results for the different blocks of
the proposed system (see figure 3.16) in a controlled setup. This means evaluating the
3D­reconstruction, in the case of the point cloud generation, and also jointly evaluate the
trajectory and 3D­mapping, in case of the SLAM. To include a scale reference, we place an
object with a known location, determined by the Optitrack, and of known dimensions in the
pool. In our case we suspend a milk crate with dimensions (H, W, D) = (0.26, 0.30, 0.4)m,
under the water surface such that it is placed approximately at the same depth as the
ROV when it is maximally submerged, while keeping retroreflective markers on it visible.
We also measure the ROV’s position using the Optitrack.
Because the pool itself contains very few features, we placed a couple of objects in the
pool such that the 3D­reconstruction would include more geometric features. A point
cloud with rich geometric details will aid GLIM’s matching, because there are more points
to match against. The objects include pipes and 3­point truss. We anticipate that the more
features/objects we add to the pool the better the matching becomes. However, because
the literature shows that marine environments are often textureless and feature­sparse,
we start out with just a small amount of objects. The amount of objects are chosen and
placed such that all that all frames captured by the ROV will have at least one object in
them.
The setup for the pool can be seen in figure 4.2 and the marker attachments to the ROV
and milk crate in figure 4.5. We note that the marker suspension methods are designed to
be completely rigid, as bendable shape would make the pose recording unrepresentative
of the real pose and invalidate the rigid body transformation4.2 of the markers.
42
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.3: The milk crate setup used to
suspend the crate under water
Figure 4.4: The marker suspension for the
ROV. This was provided by the AMR group
Figure 4.5: Marker setups. (left) shows the suspension used to keep the milk crate under
water while keeping the retroreflective markers above. To ensure that the suspension is
rigid we used a T­slot, and an manually bent metal L­profile to secure it to the crate and
the wooden plank. (right) shows the suspension used on the ROV. We used 4 markers: 3
markers required for determining pose and 1 for redundancy ad case of tracking failures
Underwater Visual­SLAM
43
==PAGE:54==
4.1.2
IMU calibration
To calibrate the IMU we used the QGroundControl sensor setup section [49]. Unfortu­
nately we were unable to obtain a good calibration for the accelerometer on the onboard
IMU for the ROV. Therefore we ended up manually estimating the bias from a standstill
sequence. The bias was calculated as the mean error in each direction:
ba =
 
1
N
N
X
i=0
a[i]
!
−g
(4.3)
where a[i] is the i­th accelerometer sample and g is the gravitational acceleration (we use
g = 9.81 m/s2). The measured bias ba is removed from subsequent measurements by
simple subtraction, acorr = araw −ba.
4.1.3
Optitrack time offset
The absolute timestamps of the Optitrack and ROS doesn’t line up due to a timing offset.
To determine this timing offset we started a motion capture session, and then a ROS
recording. Then the ROV was lifted such that it would show both a change in the Optitrack
z­axis and in the images captured from the ROV. The Optitrack data showed movement
at 55s after the start of the recording at 2025­07­23 12.40.38.412 PM (1753267238.412s)
and the ROS recording showed movement at 1753267384.782176149s. This gives a time
difference of
1753267396.782176149s −(1753267238.412s + 55.115s) ≈103.26s
(4.4)
This offset will be used for experiments to align the ROS timestamps with that of the
Optitrack.
4.1.4
Frame conversion
It should also be noted that while GLIM uses the ENU convention, the Optitrack data is
recorded as (x, y, z) = (forward, left, up). This means that consequently, the Optitrack
x and y axes are swapped relative to GLIM’s horizontal axes, as well as the direction of
left (y) and east (E) axis. More explicitly:


E
N
U

=


0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1




xo
yo
zo

.
(4.5)
44
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:55==
4.2
Point cloud assessment
4.2.1
Distance evaluation
Figure 4.6: Top­view indicative schematic of the distance evaluation experiment. The
ROV moves toward the stationary (green) milk crate along the dashed (red) line. The
retroreflective markers can be seen on top of both the ROV and the crate. At 0.25m
intervals, a point cloud is generated used for measurement (example shown in the figure).
To quantify the effect of camera­to­object distance on point cloud accuracy, we positioned
the ROV at one end of the pool and the milk crate at the opposite end (aligned vertically).
The ROV was then driven slowly toward the crate while capturing stereo images at 30 Hz.
At 0.25 m intervals, point cloud reconstructions were generated, from which the crate’s
width, height and distance were measured. A sketched setup can be seen in figure 4.6.
We use the Optitrack to record the position of the ROV and the stationary milk crate, and
the euclidean distance between them. We use the following equation to calculate the
relative percentage error:
PercentError = |xtrue −xmeas|
xtrue
· 100%
(4.6)
Figure4.7 shows the measured dimensions from within the point cloud reconstruction and
the real world dimensions vs distance. Figure 4.8 shows the relative errors derived from
figure 4.7 as well as a linear fit. The linear fit is found by determining the 1­st order poly­
nomial p which minimizes the sum of squared errors over all points. See equation4.7[50].
We score the fit using the R2­score which measures how well a line approximates the real
data where 1.0 is the best possible fit and 0.0 is the worst possible. R2 is determined from
the sum of squared residuals SSres and the total sum of squares SStot, see equations 4.10
E =
k
X
j=0
|p(xj) −yj|2
(4.7)
Underwater Visual­SLAM
45
==PAGE:56==
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
(4.8)
SSres =
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(4.9)
SStot =
n
X
i=1
(yi −¯y)2
(4.10)
Figure 4.7: Distance­dependent reconstruction accuracy. The plots show point­cloud­
measured width, height and distance of a suspended milk crate with ground­truth dimen­
sions (H, W) = (0.26, 0.30) m and doptitrack(t), (samples are taken at 0.25 m intervals).
Note: as distance between the ROV and crate decreases, so does the reconstruction
error
.
We see that as the camera­object distance decrease, the reconstruction error also de­
creases. This relation seems to be proportional to the distance, so we fit a linear model to
both the width and height plot. Although, the fit looks good, both visually and from its R2­
score, it should be noted that the points at both the start and end of the experiments fall
below the line, which suggest that there could be a more complex relation at longer and
shorter distances than those sampled during the experiment. Within our interval however
we find a linear relation of werror = 8.7d+2.4 with score R2 = 0.977 and herror = 9.3d+3.9
with score R2 = 0.964. The estimated distance error percentage also looks to be decreas­
ing linearly, correlated with the distance until d < 2m, at which point the error increases
46
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.8: Relative percent error for the plots in 4.7 between the reconstruction and the
reference (see equation 4.6). A good linear fit was found for the width and height, while the
depth doesn’t show a purely linear relation. Notice that the width and height fits have very
similar shapes, which suggest that they might be affected equally by the camera­to­object
distance.
again. This tells us that the relative distance error is not just a linear correlation with the
true camera­to­object distance.
4.2.2
Multiple objects
To examine if different types of objects affect the point cloud generation differently we per­
form an experiment where we place a multitude of objects within the camera frame. The
objects are a superset of the ones used in the other experiments. We then compare the
dimensions of the objects within the point cloud to their real world measured dimensions.
The measurements and comparisons can be seen in figure 4.9.
The experiment was planned before the discovered relation of the reconstruction dimen­
sions to the camera­to­object distance, and most importantly that the error across the
image plane is different from the error into the plane. Since the distances sampled in this
experiment is neither purely into the image plane or across it (and because the number
of samples is small) it becomes difficult to quantitatively state anything about the effect
that different objects has on the reconstruction accuracy. We can however see that the
sampled distances which go mostly along the image plane have smaller relative errors
than those going mostly into the plane, which reaffirms the conclusions from the previous
experiment 4.2.1.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.9: Reconstruction distances vs real distances. The red value is the measured
distance from within the reconstruction and the green value is the real distance. Note
although difficult to see, the figure shows a grayscale point cloud ­ not a monochrome
image
4.2.3
Failure scenarios examples
The preceding results have all been obtained in cases where the point clouds have been
visually consistent with the real world. From observation, however, there are conditions
where the system fails to generate consistent point clouds, making them unusable with
GLIM. The next section will try to showcase these scenarios.
Water surface reflections
First the most notable failure mode is when the images contain downward reflections from
the water surface, see figure 4.10. The greater the part of the image the water reflection
takes up, the more nonsensical the disparity estimate is. In the examples shown in the
figure only a small fraction of the image can contain reflections for the reconstructions
to be consistent with the real world. When used with GLIM, even short periods of point
clouds generated in the presence of water surface reflections like those shown in the figure
can cause GLIM to fail. The fact that GLIM fails with such an input is to be expected
as it is impossible to find correspondences between point clouds that are primarily just
hallucinations.
Consistency issues
Although FoundationStereo is often able to detect the walls of the pool and assign con­
sistent disparity along it, the distance to the wall, can vary a lot between frames when
the features are sparse. Figure 4.11 shows an example of three frames captured within
the same second which exhibit a significantly different disparity estimation. We have also
noticed inconsistent disparity estimates on objects moving in and out of frame. Two ex­
amples of this can be seen in figure 4.12.
These findings about inconsistencies between disparity estimates on objects and walls
should not come as a big surprise. The reason is that the inconsistencies appear in
scenarios where there are few visual clues to infer image depth from. The scenarios
shown are ambiguous and therefore produce varying estimates.
48
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.10: Four examples of disparity estimation from frames where water surface re­
flections are visible to various degrees. The red rectangles outline the part of the image
which contains the water surface reflections. In this example all but the lower right dis­
parity estimate would cause GLIM to fail.
Figure 4.11: Example of greatly varying disparity prediction on the same wall with ap­
proximately same camera­to­object distance captured within the same second. The wall
produces varying estimates because there aren’t enough visual clues to determine the
actual distance. Notice that the network succeeds to detect the wall as a wall and can
therefore assign a wall­consistent disparity along it
Underwater Visual­SLAM
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.12: Example of inconsistent disparity estimates on objects moving in and out
of frame. (Upper) shows the beam holding the crate ’merging’ with a pipe behind it until
enough visual features become present for the network to separate them. (Lower) shows
a varying disparity estimate of the end of the crate as it moves into frame
50
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:61==
4.3
GLIM assessment
To evaluate GLIM we ran three simple SLAM experiments and then assessed the result­
ing trajectories and maps. Each experiment consists of moving the ROV along a straight
line aligned with one coordinate axis: vertical (up/down), longitudinal (forward/back), and
lateral (sideways). We used the same setup for the pool as in figure 4.2 and used the Op­
titrack for reference. For the vertical (up/down) sequence the ROV dives, so the Optitrack
markers cannot remain above water; in that case we rely on the onboard depth sensor as
the reference for the z­axis.
When processing the results for the experiments we observed that GLIM had a a tendency
to start rotating the pose estimate when viewing the end wall of the pool ­ as was previously
observed to happen (see figure 3.15a). We therefore employed the same method by
masking out the parts of the images which consist of low texture segments. This alleviated
the rotation issue. Since the masking algorithm was designed for open water and not for
the walls of the pool in ASTA, it doesn’t always remove the entire wall as desired. This is
especially the case on parts of the walls which are not perpendicular to the ROV ­ such
as the bottom, sides and corners. This method unfortunately also often segments out the
smooth surfaced pipes which were added to the pool, reducing the amount of features.
Using the masking method does, however, have the benefit of not only providing results
at all, but also better simulates the intended use case, where most of the image will be
masked out due to it being open water. Figure 4.13 shows an example of GLIM rotating
the pose when the ROV should have near zero angular velocity.
Figure 4.13: Example: The pose estimate from GLIM starts to rotate when only the end
wall is viewed. Notice how the blue lines (Up­direction) starts to fan out together with the
rectangular walls. A full video can be seen at https://youtu.be/IQECAHpGCiM
The depth limitation on the ROV which was introduced to keep the retroreflective marker
above water to use the Optitrack, proved to be a significant limitation due to the effect
that the water surface reflections has on the disparity prediction from Foundation Stereo.
At the maximum depth the water surface was often within the FOV of the ROV. This was
especially true for the back/forth sequence, but also in the up/down sequence. For the
up/down sequence we had to crop the sequence at the start and end to remove the images
with water surface in them which reduced the sequence length significantly. The back and
forth sequence had large portions of water surface in almost all images and therefore had
to be scrapped completely.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.14: Top­view indicative schematic of the sideways experiment. The ROV moves
from the lower right side of the pool (lower wall in image) to the left side (upper), and
back. The path follows the dashed (red) line. The retroreflective markers can be seen on
top of both the ROV and the crate. At 30Hz images are captured from which disparity is
predicted, then masked, and converted to a point cloud
4.3.1
Sideways sequence
We start by examine the results from the experiment which had the least problems, the
sideways sequence. An overview of the experiment can be seen in figure 4.14. We split
the results into two parts: 1) the trajectory evaluation, and 2) the mapping evaluation.
Trajectory: The trajectory estimate by GLIM vs the Optitrack reference can be seen in
figure 4.15. We also plot a scaled version of the x­axis of the trajectory like we did in the
end of the section about domain adaptation (see figure 3.17). This time the scale is not
picked freely, but instead determined by using the relation between predicted width and
error found in the experiment shown in figure 4.7. We notice that after applying the scale,
the x­trajectory follows the same movement trend as the Optitrack reference, showing a
stop like the reference, at the time when the ROV reaches the left wall. The results show a
score (Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)) in the xyz­trajectory of 0.501m, 0.068m, 0.145m,
and a RMSE of the scaled x­trajectory of 0.271m. The much smaller Y and Z RMSEs
primarily reflect the fact that the ROV’s trajectory in this experiment is dominated by motion
along X. Interestingly we see a larger RMSE in Z compared to Y, although we know that
the ROV has almost no movement in z, but a little in Y. in other words, relative to the
motion of the ROV the Z­estimate shows a much greater error than the Y­estimate.
Mapping: The mapping estimate produced by GLIM can be seen from 3 views (diagonal,
overhead, front) in figures 4.16. First we note that objects in the map appear very distorted.
Consider for example the milk crate which looks to be fanned out, the extruded ladder and
the truss, which has lost its fine geometric details. The figure also highlights a pipe which
has been duplicated four times. Although the objects appear distorted, we are still able
to make out some fine details on them which have allowed us to recognize them in the
map afterward. Furthermore the objects are positioned in the right areas of map, and
match their positions in the real pool setup. We also observe that the trajectory within the
map shows the ROV moving sideways across the pool, reaching all the way from wall
to wall, which matches what actually happened during the experiment. We note that the
map appears polluted by seemingly meaningless point segments, which is partially due to
52
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.15: GLIM’s trajectory estimate on the sideways sequence. Each xyz­component
are plotted separately. The GLIM X­axis trace is also shown after applying a scale cor­
rection derived from the distance–error relation in figure 4.7. Due to how the sideways
experiment was performed we mainly expect motion along the x­axis (see figure 4.14)
artifacts from parts of the walls which hasn’t been completely removed by the open water
surface removal method. These artifacts are to be expected as the open water surface
removal wasn’t designed for this use case, so it does not perform optimally.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
53
==PAGE:64==
(a) A diagonal view of the mapped environment.
(b) An overhead view of the mapped environment.
(c) A front view of the mapped environment. (the gray line is the z = 0 viewed
from the side)
Figure 4.16: Different views of the mapped environment for the sideways experiment.
Landmark objects and walls are highlighted, as well as the world frame orientation in the
left corner.
54
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.17: Over head view of the GLIM’s mapping from the sideways sequence, and the
sampled points and distances from it. The green line at the bottom shows the trajectory
estimate. The points and distances are sampled as in the distance evaluation experiments
(see figure 4.7). Note that due to the noisy mapping estimate, the sampled points includes
great uncertainty
To inspect the global scale of the mapping produced by GLIM we sampled points di­
rectly within it and compared their distances to the corresponding real world dimensions
obtained from the Optitrack, and the known pool dimensions. The sampled points are
shown in figure 4.17. After determining the distances between the points, both within the
mapping, and the real world, we determined the relative error by using the formula:
α = dGLIM −dOptiTrack
dOptiTrack
· 100%.
(4.11)
The distances and relative errors between GLIM and the Optitrack are shown in table
4.1. The table shows that GLIM underestimates the map dimensions. The wall­to­wall
span ­ the x­direction ­ is underestimated by ≈43%. In the y­direction the relative errors
are: ROV–crate ≈48%, the crate–wall ≈59%, and the ROV–wall ≈52%. As with the depth
experiment we see that the relative error increases in correlation with the camera­to­object
distance. We note that sampling points like this in a noisy mapping inevitably introduces
a lot of error due to the uncertainty about where to sample the points given the noisy
surfaces. This mean that the numerical values reported in table 4.1 should not be used
as an exact measurement.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
55
==PAGE:66==
Pair
dGLIM [m]
dOptiTrack [m]
|∆| [m]
Relative error (%)
Left wall – Right wall
2.00
3.50
1.50
43%
ROV – Crate
1.25
2.41
1.16
48%
Crate – End Wall
0.64
1.55
0.91
59%
ROV – End Wall
1.89
3.96
2.07
52%
Table 4.1: Comparison of measured distances from the GLIM map and references (Opti­
track + pool dimensions). Relative error is computed as |dGLIM−dOptiTrack|
dOptiTrack
· 100%
Figure 4.18: Side view indicative schematic of the up/down experiment. The ROV de­
scends from the water surface, to the bottom of the pool and then back up. The path
follows the dashed (red) line. The depth sensor is used for reference. At 30Hz images
are captured from which disparity is predicted, then masked, and converted to a point
cloud.
4.3.2
up/down sequence
Next we have the up/down sequence. For this experiment we only show the z­trajectory
and compare it to the depth sensor reference. The reason we don’t use the Optitrack
reference is because the markers would get obstructed during the dive, figure 4.18 show
the setup for the up/down experiment.
While processing the results we saw that the up/down sequence has a very few geomet­
ric features in the scenes at the bottom of the pool. If we apply the open water surface
removal to those scenes then there are almost no geometric features left for the GLIM to
match against, which causes great instability during the SLAM. Therefore, we disable the
open water surface removal and try to rely on the end wall in the scene for matching. As
shown earlier the walls are not guaranteed to have a reliable distance estimate and are
correlated with incorrect orientation estimation, so we don’t want to rely too much on the
walls. Therefore we chose to use open3d’s plane segmentation method to segment the
wall and then downsample the points on the wall thereby giving it less influence on the
matching. Figure 4.19 shows the resulting SLAM in three scenarios: 1) no processing
on the walls, 2) downsampling of the wall segments and 3) walls removed completely.
We obtain the most visually consistent trajectory from the second method by keeping the
56
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:67==
walls, but downsampling them to reduce their presence. Mapping:
Although the SLAM with the downsampled walls achieves the most consistent trajectory,
its mapping is not very satisfactory. The main geometric feature in the scene is the milk
crate and the ArUco board behind it, but the mapping only shows a consistent reconstruc­
tion of the ArUco board, while the crate is duplicated. An explanation for why the crate is
duplicated even though it is one of the main features in the scene is that it moves out of
the FOV while the ROV is close to the bottom of the pool. The ROV stays at the bottom
of the pool for long enough for the frames with the crate in it to move out of the fixed­lag
optimization window (5s) so when the crate again enters the FOV during the ascent, it
might not have the previous crate to register against. This is of course assuming there
isn’t a keyframe in the optimization window which includes the crate.
(a) up/down sequence with
walls
(b) up/down sequence with
downsampled walls
(c) up/down sequence with
walls removed
Figure 4.19: map and trajectory of the up/down sequence. Visually, the most consistent
trajectory was obtained using the downsampled walls
Trajectory (in Z)
When comparing the trajectory in Z vs the depth sensor, we see that although the tra­
jectory looks visually consistent in the mapping, it doesn’t align well with the changes in
velocity that the depth sensor experiences. We see from the Z­trajectory in figure 4.20
that when the ROV descents below 2m GLIM fails to track its position and instead es­
timates the ROV as being at a nearly constant level. A likely cause for this is the lack
of features at the bottom of the pool, which causes GLIM to lose track of geometries to
match against.
4.4
Troubleshooting
By performing the experiments in ASTA we identify two notable problems which we would
like to investigate further to understand the root cause and possibly how to fix them. The
problems identified are 1) the negative influence that the pool walls have on GLIM’s ori­
entation estimate, and 2) the scaling issue in the point cloud reconstructions.
4.4.1
VGICP on the pool walls
During the experiments performed in ASTA we experienced many problems with GLIM’s
pose estimation in cases where the 3D reconstructions included reconstructions of the
pool walls. We were able to somewhat circumvent this problem by using the open water
surface removal method, but it was mostly a quick fix to achieve some results. In this
section we would like to investigate why GLIM fails in the presence of the pool walls.
First we recap the observed failure scenarios. What we experienced was that when the
reconstruction included a large part of a flat surface, the pool wall, GLIM would start mis­
estimating the orientation of the ROV, causing the pose to rotate, and thereby fanning out
the mapping. In the sideways sequence we mostly experienced this at the middle of the
Underwater Visual­SLAM
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.20: trajectory in z vs the depth sensor, produced from the up/down sequence
with the downsampled walls. While the ROV’s depth is below 2m the z­component of
trajectory shows the ROV standing still, which we can see from the depth sensor reference
isn’t correct
sequence where only one wall, the end wall, was in the camera’s FOV. Before using the
open water surface removal method, we tried using open3d’s plane segmentation method
[43] to remove the walls, but it only managed to segment the end wall and not the side
walls. With only the end wall removed we performed a SLAM session, and saw that the
position estimation of the ROV had a tendency to ’cling’ to the side wall when they were in
the FOV. In other words GLIM would estimate the ROV’s position to be mostly stationary
while the side wall was visible, and only start moving when it wasn’t anymore.
While considering the cause for this we note that the authors of VGICP state, that the
covariance regularization used in GICP makes it work as a plane­to­plane ICP [51]. It is
safe to assume that this effect carries over to the VGICP algorithm which uses the same
regularization method. This plane­to­plane registration might be the root of the issue with
the walls of the pool. What a plane­to­plane method penalizes is the misalignment of
the normals and tangential of planes. This matching causes planes to match such that
they lie flat on each other. This heavy emphasis on having the planes match on top of
each other would explain the clinging to the walls. The plane­to­plane matching however,
doesn’t constrain the rotation of the planes, so when only one surface is in view, it cannot
properly constrain the orientation. This could be why we see the orientation estimates of
point cloud input in the middle scenes of the sideways sequence where only the end wall
is visible.
While processing the results for the up/down sequence we were able to improve the vi­
sual consistency of the trajectory estimate by downsampling the points on the end wall,
effectively making the walls have less influence in the matching. This result suggests that
when we are presented with point clouds in which the majority of the points lie on a sin­
gle large plane, then we can obtain a better estimate by putting less emphasis on those
planes compared to the other geometries in the scene.
4.4.2
Reconstruction scaling issue
Next we want to understand the scaling issue in the point clouds. We first consider the
distance dependency in the reconstruction error explored in the distance evaluation ex­
periment 4.8. The results that we obtain for the 3D­reconstruction shows that although
58
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:69==
the crate is reconstructed visually well, it exhibits a distance dependent relative scaling
error in all three dimensions. The width and height of the crate (horizontal to the image)
show a similar linear correlation with the distance. This is especially apparent by viewing
the raw data points. Let’s examine the reprojection equation used for calculating X and
Y to recall which variables influence the estimate to locate the source of error:
X = (u −cx)Z
fx
Y = (v −cy)Z
fy
(4.12)
Since both the center points (cx, cx) and focus lengths (fx, yy) are constants, they cannot
be the cause of the distance correlated relative error. An error in these would show a
constant relative error. This means that the error must be found in Z (the distance going
into the image). If the error is from Z then that would also explain why the distance
correlation for X and Y is so similar as that is the only variable present in both equations.
From the results we see that Z also exhibits a relative scaling error. The error seems to be
correlated to the distance but not purely linearly like the width and height. At close camera­
to­object distances (< 2m) we find that the relative error stops decreasing and instead
increases. The rate of increase looks to be exponential, but as there aren’t enough data
points to safely conclude this. What we can say is that while X and Y show strong linear
correlations with the distance, Z exhibits a more complex relation. The total variation in
the relative error also exhibits a lower range for Z (∈{39%, 47%}) whereas the range for
X and Y are (∈{9%, 44%}) and (∈{10%, 48%}) respectively. Let’s examine the equation
used for calculating Z to recall which variables influence its estimate:
Z = fB
d
(4.13)
We can rule out the baseline as the source of error by double checking the datasheet, in
which we see that we are indeed using the right value (75mm). Again, an error in f would
show a constant relative error, so it cannot be the cause for a distance correlation either.
This leaves us with the raw disparity prediction of FoundationStereo.
Being a neural network, it is quite difficult (maybe impossible) to understand the inner
workings of the model. It could be that the distance correlation which we see is a result
of FoundationStereo not being trained on underwater imagery, and therefore behaves
unexpectedly, e.g. due to the lighting or textureless regions. One thing to note is that
FoundationStereo was evaluated on RGB­images, but we use monochrome, so that is
a discrepancy. The authors do however, state that they also have seen good results on
grayscale images, so it is not the most likely explanation for the scaling error.
What we can examine however, is whether there is being injected any distortions or ar­
tifacts into the model via the input. FoundationStereo assumes rectified and undistorted
images as its input. Failing to properly provide this would explain why the model fails to
predict the right disparity. We have verified the intrinsics and distortion parameters by
performing our own camera calibration, using Kalibr with a pinhole model with radial and
tangential distortion. Furthermore we have visually inspected the images post distortion
and rectification to verify that the images looks to be correctly rectified and doesn’t include
any radial and tangential distortion. Of course radial and tangential distortion doesn’t ac­
count for all possible distortion in existence. A type of distortion which we cannot detect
from visual inspection (unless incredibly severe) is refractive distortion. This type of distor­
tion occurs when light passes through materials with different refractive indexes, causing
Underwater Visual­SLAM
59
==PAGE:70==
the angle of incidence to change. This refraction causes objects to appear closer than
they actually are, though the effect isn’t uniform. This explanation is further supported
by the paper [52] which states that the refraction of light at the water­glass­air interfaces
causes distortion that is dependent on scene distance. This refractive distortion cannot be
fully absorbed by standard lens distortion parameters, and therefore requires the model­
ing of the housing distortion as well. The paper provides an open source tool for housing
calibration which can be used to account for the port distortion.
During this investigative process we also discovered a bug within the proposed system.
After the rectification step, we have accidentally saved the initial camera intrinsics which
are only valid for the undistorted images prior to the rectification. After rectifying the im­
ages we essentially have a new virtual camera as described earlier, so the intrinsics
change. The new intrinsics are the same for the left and right camera (ensured by the
rectification) and can be seen in equation 4.14
Krect =


730.44
0.00
318.73
0.00
730.44
240.52
0.00
0.00
1.00


(4.14)
And the intrinsics prior to rectification 4.15:
K =


610.60
0
321.92
0
610.74
237.84
0
0
1


(4.15)
(4.16)
We note that the focal lengths are significantly different from the original intrinsics, and
therefore must have a significant influence on the reconstruction. Using the wrong focal
length will show up as a bias in the relative error of Z which would explain why the relative
error doesn’t seem to be reaching 0 at any point.
60
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:71==
5
Discussion & Future Work
Before concluding the project we try to zoom out to restate the project objective and eval­
uate how well it has been addressed.
The main goal for the project was:
”To design and develop a VSLAM algorithm to enable the surveillance of Criti­
cal Maritime Infrastructure, exploring the integration of a stereo camera system
with IMU”
To address this objective we have proposed a Range­Inertial SLAM system based on
stereo matching using a pretrained neural network as the stereo matching algorithm.
Specifically, we used the SLAM algorithm, GLIM [9], and the stereo matching neural net­
work FoundationStereo[22].
The proposed system facilitates multi­sensor fusion in two important ways: 1) a factor
graph backend which allows us to add constraints of any type and 2) an input with a uni­
form data representation (point cloud) which provides great freedom in merging different
types of range sensors, both by tight and loosely coupled methods.
We have implemented the proposed system on a ROV, the BlueROV2 with the heavy
configuration ­ a vehicle suited for underwater surveillance. During the implementation
process we have used a data sequence from a real underwater environment for qualitative
assessment. The sequence was captured at Skovshoved Havn and its content depicts
marine infrastructure, see fig. 3.6.
It was found that the zero­shot capability of FoundationStereo extends to real underwater
scenes, which we conclude from its visually consistent reconstructions in the environment.
We found that when used under water, FoundationStereo interprets open water image
segments as surfaces in close proximity the camera, instead of infinitely far away points.
To address this issue we devised a method to segment the open water parts of the image,
thereafter using the segments to mask out the erroneous disparity prediction on the open
water regions. To realize this algorithm we first use SAM [45] to segment the image.
Then we detect the edges in the image and calculate the edges pr. area for each of the
segments produced by SAM. We then exploit the textureless property of the open water
segments to label the segments either as open water or not, based on their edge/area
ratio. With this method we are able to filter the open water segments of in the real marine
images from the ladder sequence at Skovshoved Havn. The edge/area threshold is fine­
tuned for the OAK­D lite and therefore likely needs camera­specific fine tuning if a different
sensor is used. Furthermore, the method was only evaluated on the ladder sequence
and therefore is not guaranteed to yield the same results in other marine environments,
especially if those environments feature less texture, increased suspended particles or
significantly different lighting. This is because these properties affect the edges within the
image and possibly also the quality of SAM’s segmentation output.
In the ladder sequence, however, the method was able to successfully remove the open
water segments. Thereby we were able to demonstrate a functioning SLAM with our pro­
posed system, on a real maritime infrastructure from the sequence in Skovshoved Havn.
From these results we observe that the trajectory and mapping estimate is consistent with
the motion of the ROV and geometry in the environment. At the same time we also note
Underwater Visual­SLAM
61
==PAGE:72==
that the mapping is very noisy, especially in the middle of the sequence where many point
clouds are overlapped. The authors of GLIM obtain similarly noisy mappings when us­
ing stereo matching, which they attribute directly to distorted input point clouds. Since
we are using a probabilistic framework for stereo matching, a neural network, the noisy
mapping could be an inevitable consequence of using such a method. The reason is that
even though the point clouds doesn’t look noisy when viewed individually, small variations
in disparity estimates from FoundationStereo will accumulate when multiple point clouds
are merged. On the other hand SLAM is a joint method that optimizes both trajectory and
mapping simultaneously, meaning that a noisy mapping also could be caused by a noisy
pose estimate, which causes point clouds to be overlapped slightly wrong. This effect will
also accumulate noise over time in the same way. The high level of reconstruction noise
reduces usable detail: in practice the pipeline reliably recovers only large­scale shapes,
while fine structures are lost or blurred. To give a confident answer to what the cause of
noise is, a quantitative assessment of the point cloud reconstruction, and the SLAM is
needed.
To this end we devised a number of simple experiments in ASTA, evaluating the stereo
matching and the SLAM both separately and jointly, to understand their individual perfor­
mances and their mutual influence. The experiments were designed to be as simple and
easy for the proposed system to solve, such that they would have limited sources of error
and would be easy to interpret.
To give a definite answer to the earlier posed question we had to be able to rule out either of
the two possibilities: 1) noisy pose estimate or 2) noisy input point clouds. Unfortunately,
we did not manage to show an experiment without noise in the pose estimate or without
noise in the point clouds, so we cannot provide a definite answer. We do, however, see
from the results that the trajectory estimate is very noisy 4.15, so although we cannot say
that the pose estimate is the only reason for the noisy mappings, we can at least assert
that it is a significant source of error. The mapping results from the pool experiment further
suggest that the noisy maps could be from improper point cloud registration, as most of
the objects in the scenes seems to have been duplicated. An improper registration would
provide an erroneous pose estimate, which provides a noisy trajectory.
While investigating the cause for the noise, we found some concrete problems which likely
has an effect on the pose estimate. The problems are:
Scaling error: We find that the trajectory makes sense within the map that is has built,
however the dimensions and trajectory is scaled down in reference to the real world. We
find that this scaling error stems from the point cloud reconstructions which exhibit a scal­
ing error in the depth estimate. We suggest that this scale difference is caused by two
things: a refractive distortion from the ROV’s payload housing and the erroneous use of
the pre­rectification intrinsics during the metric re­projection. The latter is a bug so it is
addressed simply by correcting the used intrinsics. The latter can be addressed by includ­
ing the refraction of the flat glass port of the payload housing into the distortion model,
possibly by using the calibration tool provided in [52]. Addressing these could remove
the scaling issue observed in the reconstruction. In fig. 4.15 we were able to correct the
scale of the trajectory in X in post­processing by using the distance dependency found
in fig. 4.7, to determine a scaling factor. We used the dominant geometry in the scene
(the milk crate) to determine a constant scaling factor, but in reality this is only an approx­
imation because the true scale varies throughout the point cloud and between frames. To
fully compensate for the scaling we would need to correct the reconstruction prior to the
estimation. By doing this the IMU and point cloud will have the same scale, and so they
62
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:73==
can be optimized properly together. Currently the fusion of their estimates must always
be disagreeing on the total motion. For the mapping and trajectory estimates, this would
not only correct the scale but likely also decrease the noise and misalignment.
Planer surfaces: The large flat surfaces dominates VGICP’s matching but doesn’t con­
strain the orientation estimate well, causing unstable estimates when only one surface
is present. During the experiments we circumvent this issue by either segmenting out
or downsampling the pool walls. By employing this method we observe that the objects
in the foreground show improved alignments, which tells us that their influence on the
matching has increased. For our tests in GICP the large emphasis on the walls had a
negative influence on the overall estimate, likely owing to the fact that most of the time
only one wall was visible. The plane­to­plane matching is very beneficial to have in indoor
environments, where many walls with different orientations are in view at the same time,
as this constrains the pose estimate accurately and efficiently. In an underwater environ­
ment, however, we often find ourselves in open areas. As explained in the theory section
cameras have significantly reduced range under water ­ less than 5m. Given this short
range and the reduced FOV from overlapping stereo images, scenarios where multiple
walls are present at the same time is less likely. For future development it would be inter­
esting to examine if and when the plane­to­plane matching is beneficial for under water
settings ­ especially when used with a close range sensor.
We alleviated the issue by removing points from the walls, however a better solution might
be found by instead adding more points to the reconstruction, e.g. from a secondary
range sensor with a longer range or larger FOV. Since acoustic sensors have much longer
range than the camera, and is highlighted as a complimentary sensing modality in many
litterateurs, it would be interesting to incorporate it in the solution for future research. This
direct fusion of different sensing modalities into a point cloud is a great benefit of the
solution’s homogeneous data representation.
Furthermore we also found a significant failure mode of the depth estimation module.
FoundationStereo fails to predict meaningful results when even a small portion of the in­
put image has the water surface (viewed from below) within it. It hasn’t been pinpointed
what about the water surfaces causes FoundationStereo to fail. The issue might be that
the visual information from the surfaces are so out­of­distribution that FoundationStereo
doesn’t understand the scene, but it could also be something more fixable like the in­
creased light from its reflection. If it is a lighting issue then it might be fixable by a simple
image processing technique like a normalization of the pixel intensities. In our experi­
ments we only observe the phenomenon while the ROV is close to the surface. It would
be interesting to examine if the water surfaces affects FoundationStereo in the same way
in cases where the ROV is viewing the surface from various distances and angles. If such
an experiment for example showed a diminishing effect of the water surfaces on Founda­
tionStereo’s prediction, then we would have a strong indication that the lighting from the
surfaces could be the cause. The consequences of this discovery are that for practical
applications the proposed solution cannot be used when the water surface is within the
FOV of the camera. The problem might be circumvented without finding the underlying
cause, by employing a geometric filtering method which uses the ROV’s orientation to­
gether with the FOV angle of the camera to determine if the water surface is within view.
Then we can act on this to either ignore the frame, or possibly crop it to remove the parts
which include surface reflections.
While these discoveries yield important insight into the robustness and shortcomings of
our system, they also prevented us from obtaining the quantitative data we had planed.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
63
==PAGE:74==
Because we discovered these problems near the end of the project, we did not have time
to address them and rerun the experiments to collect the desired measurements. In ret­
rospect, it would have been beneficial to invest time early on in acquiring a representative
real­world dataset with proper references. This would have allowed us to adapt and test
in the same domain and thereby reduce the number of unforeseen challenges. A numeri­
cal reference would have made it straightforward to quantify whether a parameter change
improved or degraded the estimate ­ and by how much. Instead, we had to adapt to the
domain primarily by visually inspecting mappings and trajectories.
Originally we selected this dataset because it let us begin implementation immediately
and “fail fast” if the approach proved infeasible. At the time, the project planned to use a
different camera sensor, so we did not want to invest time collecting data for hardware that
might not be used. That sensor was subsequently delayed and never integrated; however,
in hindsight we should have shifted focus earlier to the available setup. Keeping the
project timeline better in mind would have allowed us to abandon the plan to use another
sensor sooner and concentrate resources on gathering more results for the sensor which
we actually had.
64
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:75==
6
Conclusion
This project set out to design and implement a VSLAM for surveillance of critical maritime
infrastructure using a stereo camera integrated with an IMU. A solution was realized by
combining a pretrained stereo matching network (FoundationStereo) with a range­inertial
SLAM framework (GLIM), and demonstrated on the BlueROV2 platform using the OAK­
D Lite camera and Pixhawk 1 flight controller. The solution facilitates dense mapping
estimates to fully leverage the detail­rich information of the camera sensor, and multi­
sensor fusion through a homogeneous input data representation and versatile factor graph
backend. The results obtained during the project demonstrate two key outcomes: first,
modern stereo foundation models can generalize zero­shot to underwater imagery well
enough to produce meaningful reconstructions; and second, that the reconstructions can
be used in a SLAM system to generate a qualitatively consistent trajectory and mapping
in a real underwater environment.
However, the trajectory and maps exhibit significant noise and scale errors. We identified
two primary causes: (1) a processing bug where pre­rectification intrinsics were incorrectly
used after rectification, and (2) refractive distortion introduced by the ROV’s flat housing
port, which is not modeled by standard lens distortion parameters. As a consequence of
the substantial spatial noise within the mappings, only large, coarse geometric features
are reliably recoverable in practical surveillance scenarios. With these problems resolved
however we believe that the approach shows potential as an extremely versatile SLAM
solution for maritime surveillance.
To increase the robustness and accuracy of the solution we propose that future work focus
on strengthening the registration stage by fusing complementary range sensing modalities
into a single point cloud before matching, so that the registration algorithm sees spatially
larger point clouds with greater geometric diversity.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
65
==PAGE:76==
66
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Dinh Quang Huy et al. “Object perception in underwater environments: a survey on
sensors and sensing methodologies”. In: Ocean Engineering 267 (2023), p. 113202.
ISSN: 0029­8018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2022.113202. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029801822024854.
[2]
Christian Bueger and Tobias Liebetrau. “Critical maritime infrastructure protection:
What’s the trouble?” In: Marine Policy 155 (2023), p. 105772. ISSN: 0308­597X.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2023.105772. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0308597X23003056.
[3]
Joel Friesen Waldner and Ayan Sadhu. “A systematic literature review of unmanned
underwater vehicle­based structural health monitoring technologies”. In: Journal of
Infrastructure Intelligence and Resilience 3.4 (2024), p. 100112. ISSN: 2772­9915.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iintel.2024.100112. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2772991524000318.
[4]
Oda Ryggen. Surveillance of Critical Underwater Infrastructure using modern un­
derwater technology — blueyerobotics.com. https://www.blueyerobotics.com/blog/
surveillance-of-critical-underwater-infrastructure-using-underwater-technology. [Ac­
cessed 28­08­2025].
[5]
Shuoshuo Ding et al. “Robust visual­based localization and mapping for underwater
vehicles: A survey”. In: Ocean Engineering 312 (2024), p. 119274. ISSN: 0029­
8018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119274. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002980182402612X.
[6]
Song Zhang et al. “Visual SLAM for underwater vehicles: A survey”. In: Computer
Science Review 46 (2022), p. 100510. ISSN: 1574­0137. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cosrev.2022.100510. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574013722000442.
[7]
Elizabeth Vargas et al. “Robust Underwater Visual SLAM Fusing Acoustic Sensing”.
In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2021,
pp. 2140–2146. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561537.
[8]
Luca Carlone et al. “Part1 Prelude”. In: SLAM Handbook. From Localization and
Mapping to Spatial Intelligence. Ed. by Luca Carlone et al. Cambridge University
Press.
[9]
Kenji Koide et al. “GLIM: 3D range­inertial localization and mapping with GPU­
accelerated scan matching factors”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 179
(Sept. 2024), p. 104750. ISSN: 0921­8890. DOI: 10.1016/j.robot.2024.104750. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2024.104750.
[10]
Carlos Campos et al. “ORB­SLAM3: An Accurate Open­Source Library for Visual,
Visual–Inertial, and Multimap SLAM”. In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics 37.6 (Dec.
2021), pp. 1874–1890. ISSN: 1941­0468. DOI: 10.1109/tro.2021.3075644. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2021.3075644.
[11]
Timothy Barfoot et al. “Advanced State Variable Representations”. In: SLAM Hand­
book. From Localization and Mapping to Spatial Intelligence. Ed. by Luca Carlone
et al. Cambridge University Press.
[12]
Yupei Huang et al. “Self­Localization of a Biomimetic Robotic Shark Using Tightly
Coupled Visual­Acoustic Fusion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
71.10 (2024), pp. 12581–12591. DOI: 10.1109/TIE.2024.3352147.
Underwater Visual­SLAM
67
==PAGE:78==
[13]
Andréa Macario Barros et al. “A Comprehensive Survey of Visual SLAM Algo­
rithms”. In: Robotics 11.1 (2022). ISSN: 2218­6581. DOI: 10.3390/robotics11010024.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2218-6581/11/1/24.
[14]
Kai Hu et al. “Overview of Underwater 3D Reconstruction Technology Based on
Optical Images”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 11.5 (2023). ISSN:
2077­1312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse11050949. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2077-1312/
11/5/949.
[15]
Mohd Saad Hamid et al. “Stereo matching algorithm based on deep learning: A
survey”. In: Journal of King Saud University ­ Computer and Information Sciences
34.5 (2022), pp. 1663–1673. ISSN: 1319­1578. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jksuci.2020.08.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1319157820304493.
[16]
Fabio Tosi, Luca Bartolomei, and Matteo Poggi. A Survey on Deep Stereo Matching
in the Twenties. 2024. arXiv: 2407.07816 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
07816.
[17]
{Mark W.} Spong, Seth Hutchinson, and M. Vidyasagar. “Robot modeling and con­
trol”. English (US). In: IEEE Control Systems 26.6 (Dec. 2006), pp. 113–115. ISSN:
1066­033X. DOI: 10.1109/MCS.2006.252815.
[18]
Kenneth J. Waldron and James Schmiedeler. “Kinematics”. In: Springer Handbook
of Robotics. Ed. by Bruno Siciliano and Oussama Khatib. Cham: Springer Interna­
tional Publishing, 2016, pp. 11–36. ISBN: 978­3­319­32552­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-32552-1_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32552-1_2.
[19]
Dinh Quang Huy et al. “Object perception in underwater environments: a survey on
sensors and sensing methodologies”. In: Ocean Engineering 267 (2023), p. 113202.
ISSN: 0029­8018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2022.113202. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029801822024854.
[20]
OpenCV. OpenCV: Camera Calibration and 3D Reconstruction — docs.opencv.org.
https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d9/d0c/group__calib3d.html. [Accessed 15­07­2025].
[21]
Richard Szeliski. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. 2nd. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer­Verlag, 2010. ISBN: 1848829345.
[22]
Bowen Wen et al. “FoundationStereo: Zero­Shot Stereo Matching”. In: arXiv (2025).
[23]
Josh Tobin et al. Domain Randomization for Transferring Deep Neural Networks
from Simulation to the Real World. 2017. arXiv: 1703.06907 [cs.RO]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.06907.
[24]
Lihe Yang et al. Depth Anything V2. 2024. arXiv: 2406.09414 [cs.CV]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2406.09414.
[25]
Muhammad Maaz et al. EdgeNeXt: Efficiently Amalgamated CNN­Transformer Ar­
chitecture for Mobile Vision Applications. 2022. arXiv: 2206.10589 [cs.CV]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.10589.
[26]
“Generalized­ICP”. In: June 2009. DOI: 10.15607/RSS.2009.V.021.
[27]
Jakob Engel et al. “Visual SLAM”. In: SLAM Handbook. From Localization and Map­
ping to Spatial Intelligence. Ed. by Luca Carlone et al. Cambridge University Press.
[28]
Jens Behley et al. “LiDAR SLAM”. In: SLAM Handbook. From Localization and Map­
ping to Spatial Intelligence. Ed. by Luca Carlone et al. Cambridge University Press.
[29]
Blue Robotics. BlueROV2 — bluerobotics.com. https://bluerobotics.com/store/rov/
bluerov2/. [Accessed 21­08­2025].
[30]
Blue Robotics. BlueROV2 Heavy Configuration Retrofit Kit — bluerobotics.com.
https://bluerobotics.com/store/rov/bluerov2- upgrade- kits/brov2- heavy- retrofit/.
[Accessed 21­08­2025].
68
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:79==
[31]
Luxonis Docs. OAK­D Lite — shop.luxonis.com. https://shop.luxonis.com/products/
oak-d-lite-1?variant=42583102456031. [Accessed 21­08­2025].
[32]
PX4. 3DR Pixhawk 1 Flight Controller (Discontinued) | PX4 Guide (main) — docs.px4.io.
https://docs.px4.io/main/en/flight_controller/pixhawk#schematics. [Accessed 21­
08­2025].
[33]
TE. 0­30 Bar Digital Pressure Sensor | MS5837 — te.com. https://www.te.com/en/
product-CAT-BLPS0017.html. [Accessed 21­08­2025].
[34]
ROS.org. mavros. https://wiki.ros.org/mavros#mavros.2BAC8-Plugins.sys_status.
[Accessed 21­08­2025].
[35]
PX4. Using PX4&apos;s Navigation Filter (EKF2) | PX4 Guide (main) — docs.px4.io.
https://docs.px4.io/main/en/advanced_config/tuning_the_ecl_ekf. [Accessed 21­
08­2025].
[36]
Rathis Kumar. What are Global Shutter and Rolling shutter Cameras? How to choose
the one that fits the application? ­ e­con Systems — e­consystems.com. https://
www.e-consystems.com/blog/camera/technology/what-are-global-shutter-and-rolling-
shutter-how-to-choose-the-one-that-fits-the-application/. [Accessed 21­08­2025].
[37]
StereoLabs. ZED 2i | Stereo Camera | Stereolabs — stereolabs.com. https://www.
stereolabs.com/en-dk/store/products/zed-2i. [Accessed 22­08­2025].
[38]
k.koide. Getting started ­ GLIM — koide3.github.io. https://koide3.github.io/glim/
quickstart.html. [Accessed 04­09­2025].
[39]
REP 103 – Standard Units of Measure and Coordinate Conventions (ROS.org) —
ros.org. https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0103.html. [Accessed 01­08­2025].
[40]
REP 145 – Conventions for IMU Sensor Drivers (ROS.org) — ros.org. https://www.
ros.org/reps/rep-0145.html. [Accessed 01­08­2025].
[41]
Marsel Faizullin, Anastasiia Kornilova, and Gonzalo Ferrer. Open­Source LiDAR
Time Synchronization System by Mimicking GNSS­clock. 2022. arXiv: 2107.02625
[cs.RO]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02625.
[42]
Open3d. Point cloud outlier removal &#x2014; Open3D latest (664eff5) documen­
tation — open3d.org. https://www.open3d.org/docs/latest/tutorial/Advanced/
pointcloud_outlier_removal.html. [Accessed 23­08­2025].
[43]
Open3D. Point Cloud &#x2014; Open3D latest (664eff5) documentation — open3d.org.
https : / / www . open3d . org / docs / latest / tutorial / Basic / pointcloud . html # Plane -
segmentation. [Accessed 23­08­2025].
[44]
IBM. What Is Instance Segmentation? | IBM — ibm.com. https://www.ibm.com/
think/topics/instance-segmentation. [Accessed 24­08­2025].
[45]
Alexander Kirillov et al. Segment Anything. 2023. arXiv: 2304.02643 [cs.CV]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643.
[46]
Alexander Kirillov et al. “Segment Anything”. In: arXiv:2304.02643 (2023).
[47]
Nikhila Ravi et al. “SAM 2: Segment Anything in Images and Videos”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00714.
[48]
heyoeyo. Comparison of SAM and SAM2 checkpoints ∙Issue #92 ∙facebookre­
search/sam2 — github.com. https://github.com/facebookresearch/sam2/issues/92.
[Accessed 04­09­2025].
[49]
QGC guide. Sensor Setup (PX4) | QGC Guide (4.3) — docs.qgroundcontrol.com.
https://docs.qgroundcontrol.com/Stable_V4.3/en/qgc- user- guide/setup_view/
sensors_px4.html. [Accessed 26­08­2025].
[50]
numpy.polyfit 2014; NumPy v2.4.dev0 Manual — numpy.org. https://numpy.org/
devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.polyfit.html. [Accessed 18­08­2025].
Underwater Visual­SLAM
69
==PAGE:80==
[51]
Kenji Koide et al. “Voxelized GICP for Fast and Accurate 3D Point Cloud Registra­
tion”. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
2021, pp. 11054–11059. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560835.
[52]
Felix Seegräber et al. A Calibration Tool for Refractive Underwater Vision. 2025.
arXiv: 2405.18018 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18018.
70
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:81==
Underwater Visual­SLAM
71
==PAGE:82==
A
Appendix
A.1
Ladder sequence views
(a) A diagonal view of the mapped environment.
(b) An overhead view of the mapped environment.
(c) A front view of the mapped environment.
Figure A.1: Different views of the mapped ladder sequence from Skovshoved Havn
72
Underwater Visual­SLAM
==PAGE:83==
A.2
Back/forth sequence setup
The pool setup for the failed experiment on the back/forth sequence can be seen in figure
A.2. The figure also shows an example of erroneous depth map and point cloud.
Figure A.2: Top view: indicative schematic of the back/forth experiment. The ROV moves
from the back wall of the pool (left wall in image) to the end wall (right), and back. The path
follows the dashed (red) line. The retroreflective markers can be seen on top of both the
ROV and the crate. At 30Hz images are captured from which disparity is predicted, then
masked, and converted to a point cloud. Note: This experiment was discarded as most of
the images had water surface reflection in them, causing erroneous disparity estimation.
An example of this is shown in the figure
Underwater Visual­SLAM
73
==PAGE:84==
Og de levede lykkeligt til deres dages ende
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
