==PAGE:1==
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Engineering Acoustic
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
Master Thesis
August,2025
By
Victor Palle Gaubert
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Engineering Acoustic, Ørsteds Pl., Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
??
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
ii
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Ship-generated noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Plane wave
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Point source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Delay and Sum beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Array
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
SPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Sound power estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Controlled experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Results
19
4.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Conclusion
31
A Title
33
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Beamforming is a widely used technique in environmental acoustics, particularly in studies
of wind turbines, aircraft, road traﬀic, and, to a lesser extent, harbor environments. It
allows both the localization of sound sources and the estimation of their noise levels.
Compared to the other outdoor noise research areas mentioned, the study of port noise is
relatively underdeveloped. There are currently no international standards for measuring
port noise, which makes it diﬀicult to compare data collected at different sites or by
different researchers. This lack of research is not due to an absence of noise problems
in ports—on the contrary, ports are complex acoustic environments with many different
noise sources, including ships, trucks, trains and heavy machinery, which can operate
continuously or intermittently. The absence of regular noise monitoring in ports raises
concerns for the health, safety, and comfort of both port workers and nearby communities.
Traditional noise monitoring methods typically involve placing single omnidirectional mi-
crophones at various locations. However, these microphones capture all surrounding noise
at once, making it very diﬀicult to separate the contributions of individual sources—
especially in a setting as busy and complex as a port. In more controlled environments,
individual noise sources can be measured separately, but this approach is not practical in
ports due to the large number of overlapping sources, the changing nature of the sound-
scape and the fact that terminal operations cannot be paused for measurement purposes.
These challenges highlight the need for more advanced techniques like beamforming, which
can help identify and measure individual noise sources more effectively in such complex
environments
1.1
Ship-generated noise
Ship-generated airborne noise will vary in strength, time and frequency and depends on
multiple factors such as the size of the port, the number of ships, the type of the ship, the
weather conditions, the topography, the distance to the residents/workers, etc. And the
sources can be multiples for a single ship for instance Funnel outlets, ventilation openings,
pumps or ship horns. Most complains from near ports residents are due to low frequency
noises (160 Hz and below in third-octave bands). Low frequency noises are less attenuated
by air and therefore propagate further, additionally the sound insulation of buildings is
usually better for mid and higher frequencies than for the lower ones. The annoyance is
not necessarily caused by the sound level of the noise but mostly by how it is perceived
by the people.
The main source of low frequency noise for a moored ship happens to be the exhaust
funnel(s) of the auxiliary engine(s) and while it is possible to add a silencer to an already
built ship, it is expensive and sometimes too complicated of a process both technically
and economically. It is to be noted that noise awareness is increasingly taken into account
when designing and assembling the ships nowadays, resulting in noise reduction for work-
ers.
Despite the lack of studies, multiple noise measurements have been performed in different
ports around the world, but the difference in the methodologies make it diﬀicult to compare
the measurements data between each other. Different project created unoﬀicial interna-
tional standard to have similar methodology, this study is using the methodology described
in the NEPTUNES noise measurement protocol for moored ships [NEPTUNE_Guide]
as a reference for investigating an alternative methodology. The noise measurement proto-
col for moored ship from NEPTUNES specify that the measurements should be performed
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
1
==PAGE:8==
on board of the ship and with as little background noise as possible. The idea is to mea-
sure each sources individually to identify the main sources and measurements should be
performed in accordance with sound pressure measurements standard ISO 3746 [] or sound
intensity measurements standard ISO 9614-2 []. That said, in certain cases where the ship
or simply the sources cannot be accessed, then complementary measurement can be per-
formed instead. These measurement are performed outside the ship, from the docks, at
different positions and should not be disturbed by residual noise. Furthermore, the wind
speed shall be below 5 m/s and should come within 60 degrees from the source to the
receiver (from ship to microphone) if the speed is between 2 and 5 m/s. These measure-
ments should, finally, be performed in accordance with ISO 1996-2 [].
Now while the former and primary methodology is effective and give an accurate estimate
of the source characteristics with the intensity measurements, the later methodology pos-
sesses important disadvantages starting with the complex noise environment that is the
port. As previously stated, port activities cannot be interrupted for the measurements
time, plus it is very diﬀicult and time consuming to assess the background noise in a port
due to the transient and random character of the noise.
The goal of the study is to investigate whether it is possible to improve the outdoor
measurement methodology using beamforming.
1.2
Beamforming
Beamforming is a signal processing technique that uses measurements from a microphone
array, an arrangement of multiple microphones recording sound simultaneously, to localize
acoustic sources in space. First applied to acoustics in 1976, beamforming has since become
a standard tool in modern acoustic cameras. With advances in computational power, the
performance of beamforming algorithms has steadily improved. Although it is primarily
used for source localization, beamforming is also valuable in situations where a single
microphone is insuﬀicient, such as when measuring the sound pressure level of a source
in a noisy environment or separating overlapping sources. Despite having been developed
decades ago, the Delay-and-Sum (DAS) algorithm remains widely used today.
In this
project, the DAS beamformer is implemented and forms the basis of the analysis.
The DAS algorithm operates by decomposing a far-field acoustic wave into a set of plane
waves and estimating their amplitudes. The second goal of the study is to try to estimate
the total sound power of the source using a technique called Source Power Integration
(SPI) which is used in wind tunnel and flying aircraft measurement in aeroacoustics. As
the conditions of the study, ships in harbor, are similar to flying aircraft measurement,
the technique will be tested.
2
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
2.1
Plane wave
The most basic wave model in acoustic is the plane wave.
It is a wave in which any
acoustic variable at a given time is a constant on any plane perpendicular to the direction
of propagation. Its direction is defined by the wave vector k = [kx, ky, kz]. At a distance
far from the source and in a limited area, the wavefront’s curvature of a spherical wave
can be neglected and locally considered plane. The sound pressure of a plane wave is:
p(r) = Ae−jk.r
(2.1)
where r = [x, y, z] is the position vector of the receiver point.
k = kn
(2.2)
is the wave vector of the plane wave and define the direction of propagation of the wave.
k = 2π
λ is the magnitude of the wave vector and the wave number of the wave while n is
a unit vector normal to the wavefront.
2.2
Point source
Point sources, also called monopoles, are infinitely small pulsating sphere with an omnidi-
rectional directivity, which means that they radiate sound equally in all directions. Every
source with a varying volume as a function of time can be estimated as a point source at
frequencies where it is small in front of the wavelength [Fundamentals]. An outlet of an
exhaust engine system can also be assimilated to a monopole as pressure waves are cre-
ated from the air leaving the outlet in the surrounding space similarly to how a monopole
is creating sound waves. The sound pressure created by an ideal harmonic monopole is,
under free-field conditions:
ˆp(r) = jωρQej(ωt−kR)
4πR
(2.3)
where ω is the angular frequency and
R = |r −r0|
(2.4)
is the distance to the source with r and r0 being respectively the position vector of the
receiver point and the position vector of the source.
As already mentioned in 2.1, in far field for a given direction, i.e. for a given wave vector
k , the curvature of a spherical wavefront can be neglected and be approximated as planar
under these conditions. This assumption is a useful approximation in acoustic and is used
in many scenarios.
For beamforming, the spherical wave is decomposed in multiple plane waves, one for each
direction defined by their wave vector k.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
3
==PAGE:10==
2.3
Coordinate system
To explain the theory behind beamforming, it is first important to properly define the
coordinate system. Figure 2.1 represents the coordinate system used during the project,
therefore each planes, axes, angles or positions mentioned at later sections in this report
are pictured there:
Figure 2.1: Coordinate system used in the project.
For a given wave, its direction of propagation is defined by its wave vector k represented
by the purple arrow in Figure 2.1. The wave vector k is linked to the elevation angle θ,
i.e. the angle between the z axis and the wave vector k, and the azimuth angle ϕ, i.e. the
angle between the x axis and the projection of the wave vector in the xy plane. Therefore
Equation 2.2 can be expended to the following,
k = kn = [kx, ky, kz]
(2.5)
where kx, ky and kz are the coordinate of the wave vector in the cartesian coordinate
system with
kx = ksin(θ)cos(ϕ)
ky = ksin(θ)sin(ϕ)
kz = kcos(θ)
(2.6)
θ, ϕ, kx, ky and kz are represented in Figure 2.1.
Note that the wave vector is linked to the elevation angle θ, which is the angle between
the z axis and the wave vector k, and the azimuth angle ϕ, which is the angle between the
x axis and the projection of the wave vector in the xy plane. Both angles are represented
in Figure 2.1.
2.4
Delay and Sum beamforming
Beamforming is a signal processing technique that make use of a microphone array in order
to identify both source location and quantification from the sound pressure measurements.
4
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:11==
In this project, the beamforming algorithm used is the basic Delay-and-Sum beamforming
algorithm (DAS) and the array used was a uniformly rectangular array (URA). The prin-
ciple of beamforming will be explained in 2D first using a uniformly linear array (ULA).
The principle between 3D and 2D is the same, with two angles instead, elevation angle θ
and azimuth angle ϕ.
Figure 2.2: Plane wave hitting a linear microphone array with an incident angle θ.
The coordinate system introduced in Section 2.3 is used. A linear array of M microphones
is aligned on the x axis and the source is set in the (x, z) plane, therefore the direction of
arrival n of the wave is only dependent on the elevation angle θ.
It is assumed that the studied source is a monopole in far field. From Section 2.2, the wave
front for a given Figure 2.2 pictures two different scenarios of a linear array exposed to an
incident plane wave. In scenario (a), θ = 0 while in scenario (b), θ ̸= 0. When θ = 0, all
microphones receive the wavefront simultaneously, and thus measure the sound pressure
at the same time instant t. This means that when each signals are summed together,
they will add constructively. When θ ̸= 0, each microphone receives the wavefront at a
different time instant. Assuming that each microphone are uniformly spaced, the time
delay τ between each microphone measurement for a same wavefront is then
τm(θ) = dsin(θ)
c
(m −1)
(2.7)
where c is the speed of sound in air,
d is the distance between two microphones,
and m is the microphone index with m = 1, 2, ..., M.
The Delay-and-Sum (DAS) beamforming algorithm consist of individually delaying each
microphone signals then summing them together as expressed in the following equation,
b(θ, t) =
M
∑
m=1
wmpm(t −τm(θ))
(2.8)
where b is called the beamformer output, and is proportional to sound pressure in Pa
and wm is a set of weighting which will be set to one for now.
The individual time delays τm(θ) are chosen such that, for a given direction n defined by θ,
each signals are aligned in time before being summed, adding up constructively with each
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
5
==PAGE:12==
other. It is not the case for plane waves arriving from other directions as their measured
signals will not be aligned in time (see Figure 2.3). This process results in a directional
sensitivity in the chosen direction n as shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.3: Delay-and-Sum beamforming algorithm. For a wavefront arriving from the
desired direction, the microphone signals are delayed appropriately so that they align in
time and sum constructively. In contrast, wavefronts from undesired directions do not
align after delay application and therefore do not sum constructively.
Figure 2.4: Directional sensitivity of the array in the direction k. It is called the main
lobe.
In frequency domain, the time delay corresponds to a phase shift and the beamformer
output is then written as follow
B(θ, ω) = 1
M
M
∑
m=1
Pm(ω)e−jωτm
(2.9)
6
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:13==
where Pm is the sound pressure of the mth microphone in the frequency domain, in Pa.
In Equation 2.9, τm can be rewritten as follow in the (x, z) plane
τm(θ) = dsin(θ)
c
(m −1) = e−jksin(θ)xm
(2.10)
The array-related quantities, like the measured sound pressure, can be written as vectors
and matrices making it more convenient to use. The sound pressure can thus be written
as an M-size vector for a given frequency where M is the array’s number of microphone
P =


P1(f)
P2(f)
...
PM(f)


(2.11)
By keeping the same notation, still for a given frequency, the beamformer output B can
be expressed as a vector
B(θ) = v+P(f)
(2.12)
Where v is the steering matrix, with + representing the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse
matrix of v.
It represents the delay, in time domain, or the phase shift, in frequency
domain, applied to each microphone signals for a given direction defined by the wave
vector k and is computed as
v(k, rM) =


e−jωk.r1
e−jωk.r2
...
e−jωk.rM


(2.13)
with rm = [xm, ym, zm] being the position vector of the mth microphone.
In some algorithm, the Cross-Spectral matrix C (CSM) used,
C = P(f)P(f)∗
(2.14)
where ∗represents the conjugate transpose,
C is composed of the measured cross-powers Cmn = Pm(f)Pn(f)∗, and auto-powers
Cmm = PmPm∗, where m = 1, ..., M and n = 1, ..., M are microphone indexes.
The CSM allows to compute the beamformer power β, under the restrictions that v is
orthogonal. For a given frequency, it is given as
β(k) = vHCv
(2.15)
where k is the wave vector of the wave defined by the direction of arrival θ. β is proportional
to the pressure square and represents a density of energy. It is usually displayed on a spatial
source map where the high β values translate to high probability to found a sound source.
The beamformer power can also be used to estimate the total sound power of a source if
the following conditions are verified:
• The measured sources are point sources.
• The source directivity is uniform (isotropic emission).
• The beamforming output has suﬀicient resolution to distinguish between multiple
sources.
• The cross-spectral matrix (CSM) shows no coherence loss
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
7
==PAGE:14==
In this project however, v is not orthogonal so the beamformer power β must be computed
as follow,
β = E{|B|2}
(2.16)
where E is the expectation.
If v is orthogonal, equations 2.15 and 2.16 are equivalent.
2.4.1
Coherence
The coherence represents how much two signals from different microphones correlate be-
tween each other. It is computed from the cross- and auto-powers of said signals, which
translate to
γmn(f) =
|Cmn(f)|2
Cmm(f)Cnn(f)
(2.17)
A good coherence therefore translates to γmn = 1 while a bad one translates to γmn = 0.
2.5
Array
A microphone array is constituted of multiple microphones dispatched on a given surface.
The geometry and the positions of each microphones will define the The geometry, size of
the array and the position of the microphone array define the limits of the beamformer,
like the frequency range and the resolution.
2.5.1
Frequency range
The frequency range is delimited by the lower and the upper cut-off frequencies. The lower
cut-off is linked to the angular resolution Θ which depends on the wavelength of the wave
λ and the array’s aperture D. From the Rayleigh criterion, and by estimating the angular
resolution as 1 radian, it goes by
flow ≈1.22c
D
(2.18)
with flow being the estimated cut-off frequency. In practice the angular resolution Θ is
multiplied by two to avoid having the beamformer perform to close to the lower frequency
limit. The angular resolution Θ can also be deduced from the width of the main lobe at
an amplitude of 3 dB lower than the peak of the main lobe, as pictured by Figure2.5.
Finally it is linked to spatial resolution, which determine the minimum distance necessary
between two sources for the array to discern them from another. As a rule of thumb, from
the Rayleigh criterion, it goes as
Θ = 1.22c
fD = X
R
(2.19)
Note that this is the same equation than Equation 2.18.
8
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Definition of the 3 dB beamwidth.
For the upper cut-off frequency, the sampling rate fs needs to be consider to avoid time
aliasing, according to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem. The same is true for the
distance d between the microphones, it must be lower than the wavelength λ in order
to avoid spatial aliasing. Therefore the upper frequency limit must validate these two
restrictions to avoid aliasing
fup = min(fs
2 ; c
2d)
(2.20)
2.6
SPI
In practice, beamformer accuracy depends on idealized assumptions as mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.4. These conditions are rarely met in field measurements. The SPI method addresses
this by integrating the conventional beamformer output over a Region of Integration (ROI)
and normalizing it to a simulated point source placed at the ROI center. The ROI is dis-
cretized into J grid points. The total experimental sound power Pexp within the ROI is
then estimated as:
Pexp = Psim
∑J
j=1 Aj,exp
∑J
j=1 Aj,sim
(2.21)
where Psim is the absolute sound power of the simulated source, usually chosen as one for
simplification,
Aj,exp is the beamformer power for the measured source at the jth grid point
and Aj,sim is the beamformer power for the simulated source at the jth grid point. Figure
??
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: Example of the application of the SPI: (a) Experimental distributed sound
source, the black frame represents the ROI. (b) Simulated point source, placed at the
center of the ROI (white cross).
The ROI is defined based on the 10 dB beamwidth, the angular region where the beam-
former response remains within this margin from the main lobe peak. This threshold is
motivated by the commonly used 10 dB background noise criterion, which states that a
sound 10 dB lower than another is generally considered perceptually negligible and has
minimal influence on the dominant source.
2.7
Sound power estimation
Assuming the measured source is a point source or behave like one, the total sound power
of the measured source Ptot can be estimated by scaling the total sound power within the
ROI Pexp obtained with the SPI technique. The scaling factor is the ratio between the
total surface of a sphere and the surface of the ROI defined for the SPI,
Ptot = Pexp
Stot
SROI
(2.22)
where Stot is the total surface of the wave. 4πR2 for a point source for example, with R
being the distance between the source and the array. As mentioned before, the ROI is a
solid angle therefore the surface SROI is taken at a distance R,i.e. the distance between
the source and the array,
SROI = R2[−cos(θ2) + cos(θ1)](ϕ2 −ϕ1)
(2.23)
10
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
Aside from the bibliography, the project was originally composed of three different parts.
The first part is the simulation part, in which a point source is simulated and measured.
Beamforming is then applied and the results are compare to the set parameters of the sim-
ulation. The second part is the controlled experiment, where the simulation is replicated
in real life using loudspeakers as sources and a microphone array to perform beamforming.
The experiment is conducted in the anechoic chamber. Finally the third part is to move
the experiment outside, in order to verify the effects of noise from both outside activity
such as road work, wind and the effect of reflections on the beamforming measurements.
3.1
Simulation
The simulations can be separated in three categories. First, a simulation of linear array
was performed to understand and experience the functioning of beamforming. Second, is
a similar simulation using a rectangular array hence adding a second dimension. Third,
is the implementation of the Sound Power Integration (SPI) technique with and without
noise.
3.1.1
Linear Array simulation
At the beginning of the project, it was primordial to learn more about beamforming
algorithms in order to have a deeper understanding of the technique, and as such apply it to
real study cases. Accordingly, a simple simulation was coded in MATLAB using Conventional
beamforming algorithm in frequency domain.
The code simulates a point source in a 2D free field space and the linear array is represented
by five measurements points aligned on the same axis. A phase shift is applied to the
measured sound pressure to virtually steer the array in the wanted direction. This process
is done for each directions corresponding to the range θ = [−90; 90]° and the results are
plotted in which the peak reveals the position of the simulated point source. Finally, the
processing is performed for a single frequency at 1 kHz.
3.1.2
Rectangular Array simulation
The next simulation step is to adapt the model to a rectangular array with uniform
spacing, matching the geometry of the real array that will be used in future experiments.
Consequently, a third dimension is being added to the coordinate system which results,
as shown in Figure 2.1, in the propagation direction of the incoming wave being defined
by two angles instead of one; The elevation angle θ, is defined as the angle between the
z-axis, normal to the array, and the wave vector k. The azimuth angle ϕ, is defined as the
angle between the x-axis and the projection of k onto the array plane spanned by the x-
and y-axes.
The array is simulated as a 6 x 10 measurements grid with each point separated by a
distance d = 7.5 cm in accordance with the geometry of the array used for the experi-
ments. θ, the elevation angle, and ϕ, the azimuth angle, are set respectively to [0; 90]° and
[−180; 180]° to cover the whole hemisphere in front of the array. Additionally, the step
for both angles was arbitrarily set as 1°, resulting in a nonuniform angular sampling of
the steering directions. Finally, the beamformer power is displayed as a color map.
3.1.3
SPI simulation
Sound Power Integration (SPI) is employed in wind tunnel and in-flight aircraft measure-
ments to mitigate turbulence effects on microphone array data. Turbulence perturbs the
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
11
==PAGE:18==
sound propagation path, introducing phase variations between microphones. These phase
shifts cause partial destructive interference during beamformer summation, reducing the
measured beamformer power and broadening the main lobe compared to turbulence-free
conditions. The specific aerodynamic effects on the array is not investigated beyond what
is reported in [SPI] and [SPI2].
SPI is chosen here for two main reasons: Firstly, atmospheric conditions during aircraft
and ship measurements are comparable, and secondly, the methodology in [NEPTUNE_Guide]
emphasizes wind direction and velocity as essential for accurate ship-based measurements.
If SPI performs as intended, it could extend the range of environmental conditions under
which reliable acoustic measurements are possible.
The SPI technique, as explain in Section 2.6, consists of estimating the sound power within
a predefined Region Of Integration (ROI) by integrating the beamformer power in the ROI
and normalize it with respect to a simulated point source, as expressed in Equation 2.21.
Note that, at present, both the main source and the simulated point source are actually
simulated point sources placed at the same position in space. Consequently, unless random
white noise is added to the main source signal, the estimated sound power Pexp should be
equal to the simulated sound power Psim.
In this simulation, the Region of Integration (ROI) is initially defined as a solid angle
spanning 40◦in elevation and 40◦in azimuth around the direction of arrival. This region
is then discretized into a grid with a resolution of 1◦. However, such a fixed ROI is not
optimal for estimating the total radiated sound power of the source. A more accurate
approach, implemented later in the project, is to adapt the ROI to closely encompass only
the main lobe of the beamformer response. The main lobe is defined as the region where
the beamformer output remains within 10 dB of the peak value, which is defined as the
main lobe center. The choice of a 10 dB threshold follows the common rule of thumb
that contributions more than 10 dB below the maximum are negligible compared to the
dominant signal and typically fall within the noise floor. In the case of high side lobe, the
difference between the main lobe peak value and the highest side lobe peak value can be
taken as the threshold instead.
The main sound source signal is emulated as a measurement signal by adding random
white noise. Note that the estimated sound power Pexp is the total power within the ROI,
and will therefore be lower than the source’s total sound power Ptot. However assuming
that the measured sound source behave like a monopole, and as such its sound power Ptot
is uniformly distributed over a spherical sound wave, then for a given distance r ≤R, the
estimated sound power within the ROI Pexp can be scaled to the total sound power Ptot.
Finally, the model is run over the frequency range [flow, fup] = [600, 2300] Hz. This range
is given by Equations 2.18 and 2.20 using the aperture D = 0.675 m of the array and the
distance between two microphones d = 0.075 m.
So far, the beamforming power has been plotted in spherical coordinates with θ on the
y-axis and ϕ on the x-axis but to improve readability, the same map can also be shown in
cartesian coordinates.
3.1.4
Additional simulations
Up to then were described the reasoning and processing behind the simulated part but
there has been other simulations were realized either for comprehension at the beginning
of the project or due to a misunderstanding of what is explain in the bibliography.
12
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:19==
Steering vector
First comes the steering vectors. Initially for the simulations, the steering vectors were
implemented as described by Equation 2.13 but only when simulating a plane wave.
3.2
Controlled experiment
In the simulation, the source was modeled as a monopole, representing the exhaust funnel
of the ship’s auxiliary engine, with the microphone array modeled as discrete measurement
points. The next step was to reproduce this setup experimentally under controlled con-
ditions. For this purpose, measurements were carried out in the large anechoic chamber
(Building 354) at DTU. Anechoic chambers approximate free-field conditions, meaning
that reflections from walls and the floor are effectively eliminated. Sound intensity mea-
surements were conducted on both loudspeakers in order to determine their total sound
power. The experiment was carried out twice, but the first run had too little output power,
so only the results from the second run are used for analysis.
This section will be separated in two parts; First will be explained the details of the sound
intensity measurements, while the main experiment will come in second. Both parts will
first introduce the equipment used and then detail the setup.
3.2.1
Array measurements
The microphone array, shown in Figure 3.1 used for the main measurements is a uniformly
rectangular array made of 6 by 10 microphones. It has an aperture D, i.e. the overall
size of the array, of 67.5 cm horizontally and 37.5 cm vertically with a distance d of 7.5
cm between each microphones. The array is suspended in the anechoic chamber from the
top, as it can be seen in Figure 3.1, and rotated to be as parallel as possible to the wall
of the room. Note that one side is damaged, which can potentially affect the results. It
is connected by ten B&K cables to a PULSE B&K front end placed outside the room,
itself connected to a computer with the PULSE software installed on it.
A guide on
how to create the template used in PULSE as well as the PULSE parameters set for the
experiment can be find in the Annex.
A BM6 DynaudioAcoustic loudspeaker is used to model the ship exhaust funnel outlet
while a second one (same model) is used for the background noise. The array and the two
loudspeakers are connected to the B&K PULSE front end and can be manipulated from the
PULSE software. Both loudspeaker output are amplified by a LAB300 LABGRUPPEN
amplifier. For the measurements, white noise is used.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Microphone array used for the measurements. It is suspended from the ceiling
of the anechoic chamber by a thin metal bar.
Using the coordinate system defined in Figure 2.1, the array is positioned in the xy-plane,
with its vertical and horizontal dimensions aligned with the corresponding coordinate axes.
The center of the array coincides with the origin of the coordinate system and the z-axis
is oriented normal to the array plane, pointing in the forward direction, as depicted in
Figure 3.2.
Both loudspeakers are placed at different positions in the room depending on the mea-
surement. Three of them are used as the main source positions which will be called S1,
S2 and S3 for the rest of this report, and three others were used as noise source positions
and will be called N1, N2 and N3. Figure 3.2 show each position in the room relative to
the array, while Table 3.1 gives the coordinates for every sources, main and noise, in the
coordinate system described earlier relative to Figure 2.1.
Using different position combinations for the the main and noise sources allows to modify
the sound to noise ratio (SNR) without having to modify the amplifier gain, for repeatabil-
ity purposes, while also experimenting how the noise position can affect the beamforming
localization and quantification process. An alternative could be to measure less combina-
tions, but twice using a different amplifier gain on the second set of measurements.
S1, and S2 have been chosen to have different distance to the array and different elevation
angle θ while S2 and S3 have been chosen for investigation the effect of the distance on the
results for a similar direction of arrival. The noise positions, as explained earlier, allow to
investigate how the beamforming algorithm performs for different SNR values. However
the position N2 in combination with S2 or S3 is not expected to give interesting result
14
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:21==
Table 3.1: Source positions coordinates. The S positions are the main source positions,
modeling the ship, while the N positions are the noise source positions, modeling potential
noise sources.
Position
name
x
coordinate
(in m)
y
coordinate
(in m)
z
coordinate
(in m)
S1
4.100
-0.265
6.493
S2
0.570
-0.300
6.560
S3
0.540
-0.325
2.820
N1
2.940
-0.295
6.610
N2
0.590
-0.295
5.360
N3
-2.910
-0.295
2.855
for overlapping reason. The beamformer will probably be unable to differentiate the two
sources, and the sound power will ended up overestimated. Finally, N3 is the only source
on the right side of array. Additionally, it is an easy case where the noise source is well
separated from the main source.
Figure 3.2: Setup of the experiment. The blue loudspeaker represents the main source
position while the red ones represents the noise positions. In yellow is the array, with
its center defined as the origin of the coordinate system. The y-axis is directed outside,
perpendicular to the page.
3.2.2
Intensity measurements
Intensity measurements allow to measure effectively the total sound power of a source,
following ISO 9614-2:1996 [ISO_intensity]. This gives a solid reference measurement to
compare to the main measurements results after analysis.
The loudspeaker is placed in a cubic cage as shown in Figure 3.3, where each face has an
area of 1 m².
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: Intensity measurement setup. Each face of the cube has a 1 m² area, effectively
making the total sound power equal to the sum of each measured intensity.
The measurements are done according to ISO 9614-2:1996 using a B&K p-p probe. As
shown in Figure 3.3, a cube cage is used to define a closed surface around the source.
Note that there is effectively no direct way to scan the ”ground” face of the cube and as
the measurements were performed in the anechoic chamber, there is no reflection from
the ground. The directivity of the used loudspeaker is unknown however in general, a
loudspeaker directivity is symmetric with respect to the vertical axis. So, by flipping the
loudspeaker upside down, it is possible to scan the bottom face of the cube. The symmetry
assumption is verified by measuring and comparing each side face for both the flipped and
the non flipped case.
3.2.3
Algorithm modifications
The sound pressure is measured with the array in the time domain, while the MATLAB
code is based on sound pressure simulated in frequency domain. Therefore it is necessary
to convert the data from time domain to frequency domain using FFT in MATLAB. While
most software allows to define the sampling frequency directly, it is not the case for in the
used PULSE version. PULSE allow to change the measurement time and the frequency
span, which will impact the sampling frequency. One can deduct the sampling frequency
16
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:23==
from the time difference between two measurement samples and then modify either the
measurement time or the frequency span accordingly.
The effective frequency range of the array for beamforming is defined by its geometry and
goes from 620 to 2300 Hz. For the analysis, the frequency range was set from 16 to 2300
Hz due to the function used for averaging the sound power in third-octave band, which
require the first third-octave band to have a center frequency of 16 Hz.
These measurements were done using a pressure-pressure (p-p) probe, which measures the
pressure at two positions to get both the sound pressure and the particle velocity. The
particle velocity can be computed as the gradient of the sound pressure, which can be
estimated as the difference in pressure at two different positions divided by the distance
between these two positions. From there the sound intensity is computed as the product
between the sound pressure and the particle velocity at each instant in time t.
According to ISO 9614-2:1996, the scanning method consists of scanning a closed surface
around the source with the p-p probe to get the sound intensity normal vectors distributed
over this surface. The sound power is then gotten from the following,
Ptot =
∫∫
S
I.ndS
(3.1)
Where S is the scanned surface,
I is the intensity vector
and n is the vector normal to the surface.
In some cases the surface can be divided in multiple, smaller, surfaces. For each surfaces,
the sound intensity is measured and the sound power is computed. Each power is then
summed together to obtain the total sound power Ptot.
3.2.4
Unexpected issues
For most of the project, the importance of ensuring the orthogonality of the steering
matrix was not fully recognized. As a result, Equation 2.15 was mistakenly applied in
all analyses and intermediate improvements. This issue was only identified and corrected
during the final weeks of the work. However, because the correction came at a late stage,
there was insuﬀicient time to re-run the MATLAB code for all measurement cases and
complete their analysis. Consequently, the results presented in Section 4 are limited to
the measurements with the loudspeaker as the main source at positions S1, S2, and S3,
along with one additional case including a noise source in the configuration S1 and N1.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:25==
4
Results
In this chapter will be presented the different results obtained throughout the thesis. The
chapter will be divided in two main sections: The simulation and the main measurements
analysis. Additionally, each results will be discussed.
4.1
Simulations
In this section will be presented the results obtained in the simulations outside the ULA
case, which purpose was to understand beamforming in its simplest form. The beamformer
results for an URA and the SPI results, both with and without noise, will be presented
and discussed.
4.1.1
Beamformer
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 represents the beamformer power for a simulated monopole placed at
S1. The former is mapped according to spherical coordinates and the latter is mapped
according the cartesian ones. For both figures, the main lobe is clearly identified and the
side lobes properly attenuated by the weighting. The small dot is the detected direction
of arrival of the wave, which align with the one set in the parameters (see Table 3.1).
Figure 4.1: Beamformer power for a simulated monopole placed at S1, mapped according
to the spherical coordinates.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Beamformer power for a simulated monopole placed at S1, mapped according
to the cartesian coordinates.
To ensure that the beamformer is working as intended, it is better to verify it with multiple
frequencies. Figure 4.3 represents the beamformer power for twelve different frequencies
between 200 Hz and 2400 Hz. The results are mapped according to cartesian coordinates
and with a 10 dB displayed dynamic range. The main lobe is easy to identify and as
expected, it is wider in lower frequencies and narrower in higher ones. It shows that the
beamformer works as intended without noise.
Figures 4.4 and 4.5 shows the same setup than in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 but with random noise
applied to the signal with a SNR around 5 dB. The noise happen to disrupt consequently
the beamformer results, making it very diﬀicult to identify the main lobe even with the
weights applied to the results. This indicate that the beamformer algorithm used seems
very sensible to noise. In Section 4.2 is presented the results for the beamformer power
when a second source is present.
20
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:27==
(a) 200 Hz
(b) 400 Hz
(c) 600 Hz
(d) 800 Hz
(e) 1000 Hz
(f) 1200 Hz
(g) 1400 Hz
(h) 1600 Hz
(i) 1800 Hz
(j) 2000 Hz
(k) 2200 Hz
(l) 2400 Hz
Figure 4.3: Beamformer power β for twelve different frequencies between 200 Hz and
2400 Hz for the a simulated monopole placed at S1, displayed with a dynamic range of
10 dB.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.4: Beamformer power for a noisy monopole placed at S1 and with an SNR of 5
dB, mapped according to the spherical coordinates.
Figure 4.5: Beamformer power for a noisy monopole placed at S1 and with an SNR of 5
dB, mapped according to the cartesian coordinates.
4.1.2
Sound power estimation
Finally, the SPI method was verified through simulations.
For a simulated monopole
without noise (Figure 4.3), the expected outcome is that the sound power within the ROI,
Pexp, equals the chosen total sound power of the monopole, Ptot. This follows directly
from the fact that the simulated and reference signals are identical and, according to
Equation 2.21, results in Pexp = Ptot.
For the noisy monopole case with an SNR of 5 dB (Figure 4.5), the expectation would
normally be that the estimated Pexp is lower than the chosen Ptot. However, given the
poor beamformer performance in this scenario, an overestimation of Pexp is more likely.
As shown in Figure 4.4, the main lobe is barely distinguishable from adjacent side lobes,
which means that the ROI may also include these side lobes, thereby inflating the power
22
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:29==
estimate.
Figure 4.6 presents the estimated Pexp for three simulated monopole signals: one clean
(no noise) and two noisy signals with SNRs of 5 and 15 dB. As expected, for the clean
case Pexp = Ptot. For the noisy cases, Pexp is systematically overestimated and exceeds
the chosen source power Ptot. This confirms that the ROI encompasses contributions from
adjacent side lobes, which increases the estimated sound power. The difference between the
clean case and the 15 dB SNR case is particularly significant. Since 15 dB SNR generally
corresponds to negligible background noise, these results indicate that the beamformer
algorithm used for this project is highly sensitive to random noise contamination.
Figure 4.6: Estimated sound power within the ROI Pexp for three different signals, a clean
simulated monopole and a simulated monopole affected by random background noise with
5 and 15 dB. The chosen sound power for the three monopoles is Ptot = 1 W which is
equivalent to the sound power level Lw,tot = 120 dB.
4.2
Measurements
In this section are presented the results for the measured data, the results from the main
measurements are presented. In a first time are the beamformer results shown and dis-
cussed while the sound power Pexp estimated using the SPI technique is compared for
different positions and with the reference, i.e. the sound intensity measurements.
4.2.1
Without background noise
Beamformer
Figure 4.7 shows the results for 12 different frequencies going from 200 Hz to 2400 Hz.
It can be seen how the higher the frequency, the more precise the beamformer is. The
effective range was computed to be within 630 Hz and 2300 Hz, yet the results shows that
the main lobe is diﬀicult to identify at the 1000 and 1400 Hz. An explanation can be
found looking at Figure ??, which represents the variation of the size of the ROI (which
depends on θ and ϕ) depending on the frequency for the source placed at S1. It can be
seen that the size of the ROI varies a lot between 1000 and approximately 1200 Hz as well
as a little around 1400 Hz which corresponds to the frequencies identified in Figure 4.7.
A large ROI reveals a main lobe with low amplitude or high/close side lobes.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
23
==PAGE:30==
(a) 200 Hz
(b) 400 Hz
(c) 600 Hz
(d) 800 Hz
(e) 1000 Hz
(f) 1200 Hz
(g) 1400 Hz
(h) 1600 Hz
(i) 1800 Hz
(j) 2000 Hz
(k) 2200 Hz
(l) 2400 Hz
Figure 4.7: Beamformer power β for twelve different frequencies between 200 Hz and
2400 Hz for the source placed at S1, displayed with a dynamic range of 10 dB.
Figure 4.8: variation of the size of the ROI (which depends on θ and ϕ) depending on the
frequency for the source placed at S1.
24
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:31==
Figures 4.9 and 4.10 show the beamformer power at 1000 Hz for the source at position
S1, mapped in spherical and Cartesian coordinates, respectively. Both plots are displayed
over the full dynamic range. In both cases, the main lobe is diﬀicult to distinguish from
the side lobes, which exhibit comparable or even higher amplitudes. This limitation arises
from the weighting applied to the beamformer output b using a Hamming window (see
Section 3). When Equation 2.16 is applied, the windowing function is effectively squared,
which alters its attenuation characteristics. As a result, the two nearest side lobes in Fig-
ure 4.10 remain insuﬀiciently suppressed, likely because the attenuation around the main
lobe decreases too gradually. Moreover, the global maximum is not located at the main
lobe but instead at a side lobe near the edge of the beamformer window. The coordinates
of this side lobe correspond to a direction within the array plane, which may indicate an
effect linked to the array geometry. A possible way to mitigate this issue is to restrict
the elevation angle to about 70-80°, which would narrow the effective beamformer window
without significantly affecting the main results.
Figure 4.9: Beamformer power at 1000 Hz for a loudspeaker place at S1 in spherical
coordinates. The white dot represents the direction of arrival picked by the beamformer.
The main lobe is not clearly defined due to the high side lobes.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.10: Beamformer power at 1000 Hz for a loudspeaker place at position S1 in
cartesian coordinates.
The black dot represents the direction of arrival picked by the
beamformer. The main lobe is not clearly defined due to the high side lobes. The elliptic
shape of the surface plot is because of the transition from spherical to cartesian coordinates.
Sound power estimation
Figure 4.11 represents the total estimated sound power Ptot for the source at the posi-
tion S1, S2 and S3 compared to the referenced sound power obtained from the intensity
measurements Pref.
Figure 4.11: Estimated total sound power Ptot of the source assuming a monopole for
the source at position S1, S2 and S3. The reference is the results of the sound intensity
measurements described in Section 3.2.2. The frequency range corresponds to the effective
range of the beamformer.
The total sound power Ptot is expected to remain consistent across all positions as well
as for the reference, since the same source with identical parameters is used in each case.
However, Figure 4.11 demonstrates that this is not observed in the measurements. A pri-
mary reason is that the sound power estimation assumes the source behaves as a monopole
(see Section 1), whereas in the controlled experiment the source is a loudspeaker, radiating
mainly in the forward direction at higher frequencies. This results in the overestimation
26
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:33==
of Ptot. To verify this effect, Figure 4.12 shows the radiated sound power Pexp within
the ROI for the three positions, compared with the one radiated through a 1 m2 surface
facing the loudspeaker (see Section 3.2.2). Under the assumption that Pexp is correctly
estimated, the results indicate that the energy radiated into the ROI for positions S1 and
S2 corresponds to the energy passing through the front face with a maximum of 2 dB dif-
ference between 630 and 2000 Hz. The sound power Pexp for the source positioned at S3
however is largely underestimated compared to the two other positions. S3 is the closest
position to the array, with a distance of 2.9 m possibly too short to assume that the wave
front is locally planar at the array. The geometry of the wave would need to be taken
into account by adding a 1/R2 dependency to the steering matrix v in Equation 2.13.
This would results in an increase in the beamformer output and power and therefore, an
increase in the estimated sound power Pexp.
Figure 4.12: Estimated sound power Pexp within the ROI for S1, S2 and S3. The reference
is the sound power obtained from intensity measurements on a 1 m2 surface placed in front
of the loudspeaker (see Section 3.2.2). The frequency axis corresponds to the effective range
of the beamformer.
Assuming that Pexp is reliably estimated for positions S1 and S2, Figure 4.13 shows the
variation of ROI size with frequency for the three source positions. As expected, the ROI
is wider at low frequencies, reflecting the reduced spatial resolution of the array. Nev-
ertheless, pronounced fluctuations are observed in the mid-frequency range (1–1.6 kHz),
exceeding what would normally be expected. At frequencies where the ROI extends be-
yond its expected size, it may encompass adjacent sidelobes, leading to an overestimation
of the integrated sound power.
Among the three source positions, S1 exhibits the most stable ROI across frequency, while
S2 and S3 show much larger variations. For S3, this behavior is most likely explained by
the short source–array distance, where the wavefront can no longer be approximated as
locally planar. As a result, the beamformer maps become blurred and exhibit stronger
sidelobes, which may be mistakenly included in the ROI definition. At S2, the ROI alter-
nates between its expected size and values up to four times larger, even though its distance
to the array is comparable to S1.
Above approximately 1.6 kHz, the ROI becomes noticeably more stable for all source
positions. This suggests two possible causes: either the effective frequency range of the
beamformer is narrower than assumed, or the chosen source–array distances are insuﬀi-
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
27
==PAGE:34==
cient for accurate spatial separation at lower frequencies. The fact that the same behavior
is observed for all positions suggests that the cause may be a limitation in the effective
range of the beamformer.
Figure 4.13: Variation of the ROI size depending on the frequency and the position of the
source. It is computed by normalizing the surface of the ROI by the distance between the
position and the array. The surface of the ROI is computed at the same distance.
4.2.2
With background noise
As described in Section 3, additional measurements were performed using a second loud-
speaker acting as a background noise source. However, due to time limitations, a complete
analysis of these measurements could not be carried out, and only one case is presented
here for comparison with the noise-free condition.
Figure 4.14 shows the beamformer
power for two simultaneously operating loudspeakers: the main source located at S1 and
the noise source at N1. The measured SNR is approximately 5 dB, consistent with the
simulation setup. Based on the simulations, it was expected that the beamformer output
would be strongly degraded by the additional source. Instead, the results indicate that
the second source is not visible in the beamformer map. This implies that the main lobe
of the noise source falls more than 10 dB below the peak value, rendering its contribution
negligible despite the measured 5 dB SNR.
28
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:35==
(a) 200 Hz
(b) 400 Hz
(c) 600 Hz
(d) 800 Hz
(e) 1000 Hz
(f) 1200 Hz
(g) 1400 Hz
(h) 1600 Hz
(i) 1800 Hz
(j) 2000 Hz
(k) 2200 Hz
(l) 2400 Hz
Figure 4.14: Beamformer power β for twelve different frequencies between 200 Hz and
2400 Hz for the main source placed at S1 and the noise source placed at N1. The map is
plotted in cartesian coordinates and displayed with a dynamic range of 10 dB.
Figure 4.15 shows the beamformer power at 1600 Hz in Cartesian coordinates without
applying any weighting to the results.
Compared to Figure 4.10, the secondary main
lobe is now much clearer and easier to identify. However, the overall beamformer power
level is considerably higher than in the case without a noise source, even though the main
source parameters are identical in both scenarios. This effect is confirmed in Figure 4.16,
where the estimated sound power within the ROI, Pexp, is significantly larger than the
reference value representing the total power of the main source. These results indicate
that, while the spatial localization remains accurate, the amplitude is strongly affected by
the presence of the second source.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.15: Beamformer power for the main source at S1 and the noise source at N1 in
cartesian coordinates. The results are unweighted.
Figure 4.16: Pexp for the main source at S1 without and with a noise source at N1.
The reference is the total sound power of the source computed from the sound intensity
measurements.
30
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:37==
5
Conclusion
The conclusion is divided into two parts: the beamformer analysis and the SPI results.
The beamforming algorithm used in this study was the Delay-and-Sum (DAS). In simu-
lations without noise, DAS demonstrated good spatial accuracy despite its age and sim-
plicity. However, the algorithm proved to be highly sensitive to noise, which represents a
significant limitation for port measurements. In controlled experiments with loudspeak-
ers, the results were also less effective. This limitation is likely related to the fact that
the loudspeakers cannot be considered true point sources. For future studies, it would be
beneficial to use sources with a well-characterized directivity pattern.
In measurements including a second source to simulate background noise, the DAS beam-
former reproduced the spatial distribution predicted by the simulations, but the plane
wave amplitudes were strongly overestimated. This led to significant overestimation of
the sound power.
The SPI technique produced poor results for both noisy simulated monopole signals and
measurements with a noise source. However, in both cases the issue originated from the
degraded beamformer performance rather than the SPI method itself. In contrast, for the
noise-free loudspeaker measurements, the SPI results appear promising, particularly when
considering that the loudspeaker primarily radiates forward.
Overall, it remains diﬀicult to conclude whether SPI combined with beamforming can
be effectively applied to ship noise measurements in ports. One fundamental limitation
lies in the practicality of beamforming: a microphone array capable of resolving low-
frequency noise would either need to be very large or have a tailored geometry. Moreover,
it is still unclear whether SPI can reliably estimate the total sound power of a source in
outdoor environments, where weather conditions may play a role. Finally, the acoustic
complexity of harbors makes it challenging to rely on DAS beamforming. A more advanced
beamforming algorithm would likely be required for such applications.
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
31
==PAGE:38==
32
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
==PAGE:39==
A
Title
Monitoring of noise from ships in harbors
33
==PAGE:40==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information?
Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at
all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written
and an impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be
written in of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words
should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
??
