==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Ocean anomaly detection models
for the European Digital Ocean Twin
(EDITO) platform
Author: Dario Cannistrà
Supervisors:
Patrizio Mariani
Asbjørn Christensen
==PAGE:2==
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resources
Technical University of Denmark
Henrik Dams Allé
Building 202
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There is a growing need to understand how the ocean and atmosphere are
evolving over time, not only in terms of long-term trends, but also in relation
to extreme events and anomalies. These anomalies arises across a range of
geophysical variables such as sea surface temperature, salinity, ocean currents,
and atmospheric pressure. However, detecting and characterizing anomalies
is challenging due to differences in data scale, resolution, and modality, in-
cluding variations across space (surface 2D, depth 3D), time, and multiple
variables correlation.
Recently the European Union has launched the European Digital Twin of
the Ocean initiative aiming at creating a virtual interactive representation
of marine and coastal environments by integrating advanced numerical mod-
elling, artificial intelligence and hpc techniques to run algorithms and ocean
models. Its objectives is to enhance ocean knowledge and management and to
make ocean models available to a larger audience such as governments, poli-
cymakers, researchers, businesses and to the public in general.
In this context the detection of ocean anomalies (Marine Heat Waves, cold
spells, low oxygen zones, Harmful algal blooms, etc.) are of particular con-
cern for scientists, ecosystem managers, policy makers and society at large.
This project will develop ocean anomaly models that are suitable for integra-
tion to the EDITO infrastructure. It will leverage multi source oceanographic
datasets from EU existing data programs such as the “Copernicus Marine Ser-
vice” and the “European Marine Observation & Data Network (EMODnet)”,
integrated through the EDITO Data Lake.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of DTU Aqua at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science in Computer Science and Engineering at ’The Technical University
of Denmark’ in Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
During my M.Sc. studies at DTU, I was driven by the desire to apply my
technical knowledge to real-world challenges.
I was looking for something
meaningful—something that could combine my background in computer sci-
ence with my personal interests. That’s when I decided to reach out to the
Department of National Aquatic Resources, DTU Aqua. I have always had a
fascination with the ocean, and my discussions with Professor Patrizio Mari-
ani further sparked my curiosity about ocean data analysis.
The thesis follows a hierarchical structure, gradually increasing the level of
detail.It begins by introducing the problem domain and the motivations and
reason of why we need this type of applications. The subsequent chapters
present the methodology and relevant preliminaries necessary for understand-
ing the proposed work. The main body of the thesis details the design and
implementation of the proposed solution, followed by a thorough evaluation
and a discussion linking the achievement of the primary objectives. The work
concludes with a summary of findings and suggestions for future work.
Kongens Lyngby, 5th October 2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor Patrizio Mariani for introducing
me to the theme of Ocean data analysis and for offering me the opportunity
to collaborate with DTU Aqua department. His meetings were essential and
inspired me to stay concentrated and overtake challenges.
I would like to thank my family for always believing in me and give me freedom
in my life and professional career choices. Their continuous support allowed
me to live many opportunities and experiences during these years of university.
They are the main reason for my achievements, grazie mille.
I would like to thank you the continuous support of all my friends and my
roommates/brothers for keeping me up during dark days. They were all al-
ways there to support me when I wanted to give up and gave me the best
advices and life examples. I will bring you all in my heart.
Ad ultimum, I would like to thank Denmark and DTU, you changed me into
a grown up man, you made me understand what I like and dislike in life. You
made me living exclusive opportunities and you shaped the student and the
man I am now.
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ALM
Application Lifecycle Management
API
Application User Interface
CI/CD
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
CLT
Central Limit Theorem
CMEMS
Copernicus Marine Service
DestinE
Destination Earth
EDITO-Infra EU Public Infrastructure for the European Digital Twin
Ocean
EMODnet
European Marine Observation and Data Network
EVD
Extreme Value Distributions
EVT
Extreme Value Theory
EU DTO
European Digital Twin of the Ocean
GEV
Generalized Extreme Value
ghcr
GitHub Container Registry
GUI
Grafical User Interface
HPC
High Performance Computing
i.i.d.
independent and identically distributed
NetCDF
Network Common Data Form
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
v
npm
Node Package Manager
OOP
Object Oriented Programming
UI
User Interface
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
iv
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Building a Digital Twin of the Ocean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Personal Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Platform Background
6
2.1
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Edito Infra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Edito Model Lab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
EDITO Datalab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Data Lake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Marine Data Formats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Platform requirements for services and processes
. . . . . . . .
11
3
Scientific Background
13
3.1
Definition of anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Anomalies Detections Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Data Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
3.2
Extreme Value Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Extreme Value Distributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) Method . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Anomaly Detection with EVT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.4
Streaming EVT: SPOT and DSPOT . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.5
Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
System Design and Architecture
21
4.1
Solution Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
CI/CD Pipeline Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Deployment technology stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Kubernetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Helm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.3
Onyxia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Monitoring and Validation:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Data Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.1
Data Lake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Backend Implementation
29
5.1
API Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Anomaly Detection logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Important Libraries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Error Handling and Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Local Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Frontend Exposure and Integration
39
6.1
React and Vite Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
React Components Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Component Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Frontend UI Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Deployment Strategy
44
7.1
Service Dockerization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2
Helm Charts and Kubernetes Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2.1
Kubernetes Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Local Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4
EDITO Elastic Cluster and Resource Management . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
8
Evaluation and Discussion
52
8.1
Performance Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.3.1
Northeast Pacific “Blob” Event (2015) . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.4
Use of AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9
Conclusion
62
9.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Appendices
65
Appendix A Docker Files
67
A.1 Frontend Docker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Backend Docker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Appendix B Agile Manifesto
69
Appendix C Codebase
70
C.1 Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Appendix D Deployment Pipelines
72
D.1 Deployment to GHCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
D.2 Service Deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the past decades, our planet has faced increasing environmental stress
due to human activity, resource overexploitation, and climate change. Rising
global temperatures, melting ice sheets, ocean acidification, and the intensifi-
cation of extreme weather events are now well documented phenomena, with
serious implications for ecosystems, coastal infrastructure, and human liveli-
hoods. Among these challenges, the ocean, our planet’s largest carbon sink
plays a central but complex role because it absorbs around 90% of the ex-
cess heat and energy coming from the greenhouse gas emission trapped in
the Earth’s system. Monitoring and understanding marine environments is
therefore a key pillar in addressing climate-related risks.
To meet the commitments outlined in the Paris Agreement of 2015 and to
support the goals of the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Develop-
ment, the international community is investing heavily in technology enabled
environmental monitoring systems. These systems, powered by satellite re-
mote sensing, in situ measurements, and high-performance computing, can
help scientists predict natural hazards, track pollution sources, and assess
long-term ecological change.
1.1
Building a Digital Twin of the Ocean
One of the most ambitious and transformative concepts for simulating and
forecast catastrophic events is the development of a digital twin of the Earth
and Ocean, a comprehensive, real-time virtual representation of our planet’s
systems. Digital twins integrate massive volumes of heterogeneous data into a
unified model capable of simulating environmental dynamics at multiple scales.
In Europe, several missions are driving this vision forward:
• Destination Earth (DestinE) aims to build a high-precision digital
model of the Earth by 2030, supporting climate adaptation, energy tran-
sition, and disaster risk reduction.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Restore our Ocean & Waters having the goal of restoring the health
of the ocean, seas, and inland waters-by 2030. Supporting the digital
transition, it is investing in building a digital tool to monitor the ocean
and water condition; EDITO.
• EDITO (European Digital Twin Ocean) focuses specifically on the
marine domain, providing an open, federated infrastructure to host, sim-
ulate, and interact with ocean models and data in real time. It is built
in support of the previously mentioned EU mission.
This thesis focuses on the EDITO platform, and contributes to its ecosys-
tem by integrating a scientific processing service that detects anomalies in
ocean model outputs. EDITO’s goals is to be integrated in the DestinE ini-
tiative to create a unified digital twin model of the whole planet.
1.1.1
Use Cases
The primary mission of EDITO is to develop applications that inform decisions
and actions in support of the EU Mission: ”Restore our Ocean& Waters”. The
mission has the scope to enable effective decision making on events that could
threat the marine ecosystems by enabling timely, data-driven decisions. ED-
ITO’s Digital Twin Ocean (DTO) framework allows scientists, policymakers,
and stakeholders to explore real-time and simulated marine conditions. One
of its most promising feature is the development of What-if-Scenarios. These
are simulations that model the potential consequences of different choices or
circumstances, allowing individuals or organizations to better prepare for the
future.
Among the most well known application of the DTO initiatives are:
• Marine Plastic Tracker: a tool to combat marine plastic pollution and
safeguards marine environments.
it simulates the transport of plas-
tic waste in the ocean, helping policymakers understand how pollution
spreads and where intervention strategies would be most effective. This
supports EU policies aimed at reducing marine plastic pollution and
preserving biodiversity in coastal ecosystems.
• Meteotsunami Early Warning Prototype: A high-resolution ocean model
that helps detect and forecast meteotsunamis risk triggered by rapid
changes in atmospheric pressure. With extreme weather events become
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Objectives
3
more frequent due to climate change, early detection becomes critical
for coastal safety and disaster management.
• Aquaculture Planning and Water Quality Monitoring: this application
support decision making in the selection for aquaculture site by sim-
ulating the water quality dynamics (e.g.
salinity, oxygen levels and
temperature). For example, in oyster farming, models can predict ma-
rine heatwaves few days in advance, allowing farmers to take protective
measures that reduce losses.
These use cases are just some of the applications that DTO actually sup-
ports. Thanks to its versatile infrastructure, the Digital Twin Ocean is set
to play a vital role in Europe’s blue economy and in the achievement of the
sustainable goals set for 2030.
1.2
Objectives
The main objective of this thesis is to develop and deploy on EDITO a work-
ing prototype of an ocean anomaly detection model on the EDITO platform.
The prototype consists of a full-stack application, combining a Python based
backend API, a React based frontend GUI and containerized deployment us-
ing EDITO’s technology stack (Docker, Helm, Kubernetes).
While the implementation and deployment of this prototype is the central fo-
cus, the thesis also aims to document and support the integration of such ser-
vices into the EDITO environment. The following Primary Objectives (POs)
complement the main goal:
• PO1: Describe the scientific background of anomaly detection methods
and how they apply to oceanographic data.
• PO2: Compare and evaluate different anomaly detection.algorithms
and models (e.g., statistical, machine learning, hybrid approaches) in
terms of performance and suitability for various environmental data
types handling data ingestion from multiple cloud systems.
• PO3: Assess the accuracy, usability, and interpretability of different
visualization methods on the EDITO infrastructure.
• PO4:
Publish the model in accessible format (e.g., GitHub) and pro-
vide the technical documentation describing its use under EDITO.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Personal Motivation
The motivation behind this thesis is both professional and personal. As a
student of Computer Science with a background in software and data engi-
neering, I have always been interested in the role of technology in solving real
life problem. Driven by my passion for sailing, I had the opportunity of hav-
ing previously collaborated on marine-related projects, such as physical water
sample collection for water pollution analysis. These experiences ignited a cu-
riosity about how technology could support marine science and environmental
monitoring.
During my Master’s studies and thanks to my part-time job as a Software
Engineer in a Danish start-up, I became interested in the way big service
infrastructure are built and operate. The EDITO platform offered a unique
opportunity to work at the intersection of data science, oceanography, and
cloud-native technologies. It allowed me to contribute to an ongoing European
effort to build a Digital Twin of the Ocean (DTO).
This thesis represents a hands-on opportunity to apply my technical knowl-
edge in an impactful domain by building a complete full-stack application cov-
ering all the steps from development to final deployment. In the context of
the EDITO infrastructure I combined scientific data workflows, anomaly de-
tection methods, full-stack service design, and modern deployment practices
such as Docker, Kubernetes, and Helm.
1.4
Thesis Outline
The upcoming chapters present the development and deployment of a proto-
type Ocean anomaly detection model service for the European Digital Ocean
Twin (EDITO) platform.
The first chapters from Chapter 2 to Chapter 4 provides to the reader a
high level technical overview of the platform, the scientific context and the
architectural decisions of the project. From Chapter 5 to Chapter 7 serves as
technical documentation, providing the necessary information to understand,
modify and deploy the complete codebase and service pipeline.
Following a detailed chapter overview:
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Thesis Outline
5
• Chapter 2 – Platform Background: An overview of the EDITO
infrastructure, its components, and its relevance within the European
marine data ecosystem. It describes how to access the platform GUI
from a developer user perspective.
• Chapter 3 - Scientific Background: Description of the scientific
principles behind anomaly detection in environmental system and how
they apply to air and ocean.
• Chapter 4 – Design and Architecture: Description of the design
principles adopted for the implementation and deployment of the anomaly
detection service, including API structure, data flow, and deployment
strategy.
• Chapter 5 – Backend Implementation: A detailed discussion of
the service logic backend codebase, data structures, and model behavior,
with a focus on the scientific processing pipeline.
• Chapter 6 – Frontend Implementation and Integration: A de-
tailed discussion of the service logic frontend codebase, describing its
components and its interaction with the backend. Assessing its integra-
tion with the EDITO UI.
• Chapter 7 - Deployment Strategy: Documents the entire deploy-
ment process for backend, frontend and service deployment. Provides
technical documentation on the accuracy and reusability of the pipeline.
• Chapter 8 – Evaluation and Discussion: Assessment of system
performance, API usability, deployment portability, and limitations.
• Chapter 9 – Conclusion and Outlook: Summary of the work, key
takeaways, and potential extensions for future research or operational
integration.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2
Platform Background
This chapter presents the high level technical background for the EDITO plat-
form and its architectural components, focusing on the environment in which
the developed anomaly detection service is deployed: ”EDITO Datalab” at
https://datalab.dive.edito.eu/.
As the Digital Twin Ocean initiative
evolves, the EDITO framework is designed to support advanced data process-
ing services, such as the one developed during this thesis, by providing access
to ocean datasets, computational infrastructure, and a unified deployment
model. The goal of this section is to provide a foundation reference to un-
derstand the platform’s Grafical User Interface (GUI) structure and how the
platform appears from a user centric overview.
2.1
Architecture
Given the escalating frequency of severe weather incidents and fluctuating cli-
mate patterns, there is the necessity of building a digital twin of the Earth.
EDITO has the mission of building a digital twin of the Ocean leveraging
extensive data, innovative Ocean system models and advanced computing to
enable users to investigate possible alterations of the Ocean.
EDITO is the core instructure of the European Digital Twin of the Ocean
(EU DTO)). EDITO offers to diverse users three distinct offerings: Explore,
Create, and Contribute [1].
• EDITO Explore:
This service targets all users and allow them to explore
and navigate part of the resources without having to register.
• EDITO Contribute:
This service targets institutional or business users.
It offers them the opportunity to share their data to become part of the
ecosystem.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Architecture
7
• EDITO Create:
This Service targets advanced users who are looking
to access ocean data by taking adantage of the platform fast processing
and computing capacity. it offers the perfect environment for building
digital twin and generating new marine information and new tools.
The EDITO Platform Framework represents a comprehensive structure
including a suite of services, tools and functionalities to enable users and
third parties to interact and operate with the ecosystems. The Framework’s
backbone is supported by EDITO Datalab that is the environment that allows
you to publish and launch your new service. The anomaly detection model
was deployed and tested using this environment.
Figure 2.1. Architecture of EDITO
Figure 2.1 illustrates the EDITO architecture behind the whole platform.
On the right side, it covers the ecosystem needed to run and deploy services
and processes and link them to real time Ocean data. All of them are backed
by API and GUI, hence they can seamlessly interact internally among them
or being integrated with external resources.
On the left side, there is the
front-end part which allow to any type of user to have access to the platform
in a simulated Ocean Digital Twin. The What-if scenarios instead are still not
fully implemented and they represent the main challenge since they allow to
generate data that have never been created before.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Platform Background
2.1.1
Edito Infra
The EU Public Infrastructure for the European Digital Twin Ocean (EDITO-Infra),
is the framework in which EDITO began. It ran from October 2022 to Febru-
ary 2025. It was a 2-year project that built the public infrastructure back-
bone for EDITO by integrating key data service components (among which
Copernicus Marine Service and European Marine Observation and Data Net-
work (EMODnet)), and by sharing cloud processing capabilities and software
into a single digital framework [2]. It was the predecessor of ”EDITO 2” and it
combines Artificial Intelligence (AI) and High Performance Computing (HPC)
to build a digital replica of the ocean. Furthermore, the deployment repository
associated with the infrastructure still retains the same name, edito-infra,
as it provides the operational and software foundation upon which the new
EDITO system is built. The repository remains publicly accessible on GitLab
at: https://gitlab.mercator-ocean.fr/pub/edito-infra.
2.1.2
Edito Model Lab
EDITO-Model Lab is a Horizon Europe project working to develop the next
generation of ocean numerical models to be integrated into the EU public
infrastructure of the European Digital Twin of the Ocean (EDITO-Infra) and
providing access to focus applications and simulations of what-if scenarios for
the sustainable management of marine environments [3]. Edito Model Lab is
running from January 2023 to December 2025 and it is preparing the next
generation of ocean models, to be integrated in EDITO.
From a system Integration perspective, the Model Lab enables developers
to connect their model inputs and outputs to the EDITO Infra data flow,
leveraging its powerful computational power and platform APIs. Although
this thesis does not interact with EDITO Infra and EDITO Model Lab di-
rectly, they were the predecessors of EDITO Datalab. They interface with
their internal structure in a similar way. In addition, they follow the same
standardized process deployment mechanisms which will be analysed in chap-
ter 7.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 EDITO Datalab
9
2.2
EDITO Datalab
EDITO Datalab is the modern infrastructure of EDITO. It is the interactive
environment where services and processes are launched, managed, and tested.
It is the platform I interacted during the development of my thesis to deploy
and launch the anomaly detection model. It builds upon the EDITO-Infra and
Model Lab infrastructure by offering users the ability to deploy containerized
services, access shared datasets, and execute workflows. Like in the previous
two projects, EDITO Data Lab is backed by API and graphical web interfaces
for facilitating the interaction among internal and external resources.
There are two types of applications exposed in the Datalab:
• Services: Interactive web application such as API and graphical web
interfaces. They are tools like end-user applications dedicated to anyone
or a specific communitý.
This is the case of the anomalies detection
model developed in this thesis as a full-stack service accessible through a
RESTful interface with the objective to predict physical and biochemical
ocean anomalies.
• Processes: Non-interactive batch functions with the only scope to gen-
erate data. During execution they are not interactive and the user can
only configure them at runtime. They may serve as back-end functions
for other services, but at the moment this functionality is not available.
Processes can generate some ocean data that can be retrieved from the
user in the "My Files" page.
The Datalab interface separates services and processes into two catalogues:
one for processes and one for services that can be chosen from a left menu.
After you click on one of them you can visualize a menu with different ap-
plications, figure 2.2(a). Users can filter applications by domain and launch
selected tools with custom configuration. The filter options at the moment
are: Ocean modelling, Ocean data quality, Data Visualization, What-If ap-
plications, Focus applications, IDE, Databases, Automation and Playground
which is used for testing.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Platform Background
((a))
((b))
Figure 2.2. Screenshots of the EDITO platform. (a) Service catalogue menu, where
available applications can be selected. (b) My Service page, showing the configuration
and launch options for the selected service.
After selection, users can specify runtime parameters such as input files,
data paths (e.g., S3 URIs), allocated resources, which container image to
execute and credentials to access Copernicus Marine, figure 2.2(b).
2.3
Data Lake
EDITO relies on a data access component named ”Data Lake” that aggregates
data from various sources such as satellite remote sensing, in-situ measure-
ments, and ocean models. This data is made available to deployed services
through mounted volumes or platform-specific APIs. The data lake is designed
to support eﬀicient spatio-temporal access, making it well suited for anomaly
detection, statistical analysis, and visualization tasks. All services deployed
on the platform are expected to interact with the data lake in a secure and
eﬀicient manner.
2.3.1
Marine Data Formats
EDITO services interact with marine environmental data that is typically grid-
ded in space, time and depth, covering global oceans or regional domains. This
data is stored in standardized formats optimized for large multidimensional
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Platform requirements for services and processes
11
arrays. The understanding of this formats is essential to grasp the internal
logic of the anomaly detection service.
One of the most common and used format is the Network Common Data
Form (NetCDF), a set of interfaces for array oriented data access. It consists
of a binary file format designed to store multidimensional scientific data, such
as temperature or salinity fields that vary across latitude, longitude, depth,
and time. The NetCDF format (.nc) is widely used to stores and retrieve data
in the form of arrays. Some of its advantages is to be very scalable, portable
and smaller in size compared to other data formats. One reason for this ef-
ficiency is that coordinates such as latitudes, longitudes and time are stored
only once in the file, rather than being repeated for each raw like in the .CSV
format. In Python the most effective way to interact with this format is the
Xarray library discussed in chapter 5.2.1
2.4
Platform requirements for services and
processes
Services and processes deployed within EDITO must conform to several plat-
form requirements:
• Containerization: Applications must be packaged as Docker contain-
ers. Helm charts are used to define deployment configurations (image
version, port, environment variables).
• API Exposure: Services should expose clearly defined endpoints (e.g.,
OpenAPI/Swagger) and support JSON input/output where appropri-
ate.
• Security and Authentication: Services must integrate with the plat-
form’s SSH and token-based access system. For instance, SSH keys are
managed through the command /opt/loadHpcSshKeys.sh, which en-
ables connections to HPC centers.
• Resource Declaration: Memory, CPU, and storage requirements must
be specified in Helm values. Services are scheduled accordingly.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Platform Background
• Validation and Testing: Before public deployment, services are tested
in sandbox environments such as the Datalab Playground to ensure they
meet performance and compatibility standards.
The anomaly detection prototype developed in this thesis was packaged in
accordance with these requirements and deployed successfully in the Playgronud
using the Helm-based process described in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Scientific Background
This chapter presents the scientific concepts that define an anomaly and dis-
cusses the different approaches used to detect outliers. The chapter explores
the algorithms behind anomaly detection as well as the types of applications
where such methods are essential.
3.1
Definition of anomalies
An anomaly (or outlier) is generally understood as a variation from the norm:
a data point or pattern that significantly deviates from expected behavior [4].
In practice, the detection of an anomaly with absolute certainty is impossible.
For example, one may conclude that a point p is more anomalous than a point
q, but it is rarely possible to guarantee whether either is a true anomaly.
When detecting anomalies, three scenarios are typically encountered:
• Correct Detection: the abnormal data correctly reflects an abnormal
process.
• False Positive: the underlying process is normal, but the data appears
abnormal (e.g., due to noise or measurement errors).
• False Negative: the process is abnormal, but the anomaly signal is
hidden or weak, making it indistinguishable from normal behavior.
Minimizing one type of error often increases the other. Moreover, the cost
of false positives and false negatives is rarely symmetric. In some applica-
tions, such as medical diagnosis, it is safer to accept more false positives (over-
diagnosis) rather than risk missing a malignant condition (false negative).
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Scientific Background
3.1.1
Anomalies Detections Methods
Anomalies can be detected using different approaches, which are broadly classi-
fied into three categories: statistical, distance-based, and density-based meth-
ods [5]. Each family of methods relies on a distinct definition of what consti-
tutes “normality,” and therefore on different assumptions about the data.
Statistical Methods
Statistical techniques assume that the data follow
an underlying distribution or can be described by simple summary statistics.
Outliers are then defined as values lying far from this central tendency.
• Mean and standard deviation: Using Tchebychev’s inequality or
normality assumptions is possible to state that for any random variable
X with mean µ and variance σ2 :
P( |X −µ| ≥kσ ) ≤1
k2 ,
k > 0,
The probability that X deviates more than k standard deviations from
the mean is bound to k. If k = 2, there are at most 25% of points that
lie more than two standard deviations away from the mean. Therefore,
these data points can be flagged as outliers. For example, in a Gaussian
distribution which is characterized by a very light tail, probabilities de-
cay exponentially. Assuming k = 3, fewer than 0.3% of observations in a
Gaussian distribution should fall outside this range. Hence, the margin
for outliers is very low.
• Quartile-based method: This approach uses the interquartile range
(IQR). Given first and third quartiles Q1 and Q3, the normal range is
defined as
[Q1 −1.5(Q3 −Q1), Q3 + 1.5(Q3 −Q1)].
Points outside this interval are anomalies.
This method is robust to
skewed data and resistant to the influence of extreme values. In this the-
sis, we employed a classical statistical method inspired by this approach.
First, for each variable we computed a long-term monthly climatology,
i.e. the monthly mean values across all years of the database. Then,
for each year we calculated the daily mean values and expressed them
as deviations from the corresponding long-term monthly mean. Finally,
we defined the anomaly threshold as the empirical 95th percentile of
these deviations. Data points exceeding this threshold were classified as
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Definition of anomalies
15
anomalies. The approach is described carefully in the Anomaly Detec-
tion Logic section 5.2.
This approach provides a baseline for anomaly detection in climate data.
The use of the monthly climatology accounts for the strong seasonal cycle
(avoiding false positive derived from warm summers or cold winters),
while the daily deviations highlight the variability relative to ”expected”
condition for the year that the user wants to analyze. The 95th percentile
ensures that anomalies correspond to unusually large events relative to
the typical variability of the system and it avoids assuming Gaussianity
and directly ties anomalies to the empirical distribution. This makes
the method particularly suitable as an initial screening tool for climate
extreme event.
Distance based methods
Distance-based approaches define anomalies as
points that are far from the rest of the dataset in the feature space. Distances
are typically measured using the Euclidean metric, though other choices such
as Manhattan or Mahalanobis distances are possible. Formally, the k-distance
of a point is the distance to its k-th nearest neighbor. A point is considered
anomalous if its k-distance exceeds a predefined threshold. In machine learn-
ing, this principle is the foundation of methods such as the k-Nearest Neigh-
bors (k-NN) anomaly score, which generalizes the concept to high-dimensional
spaces.
Density-based methods
In contrast to distance approaches, density-based
methods compare the local density of data around a point with that of its
neighbors. The intuition is that anomalies occur in regions where the data is
sparse relative to surrounding areas. A representative example is the Local
Outlier Factor (LOF), which assigns an anomaly score based on the ratio of
the local density of a point to the average density of its k nearest neighbors.
Points with significantly lower relative density are flagged as anomalies.
3.1.2
Data Distributions
A central aspect of anomaly detection is the definition of what is normal, which
is almost always correlated to the underlying data distribution. Anomalies are
deviations from normal patterns indentified using distance, density, or ranked
based methods. Outliers that do not conform to this expected distribution
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Scientific Background
raise a flag.
Different distributions give rise to different interpretations of
abnormality:
• Normal Distribution: If data follows a Gaussian distribution, anoma-
lies are often defined as points lying far in the tails. For instance, obser-
vations more than three standard deviations from the mean are typically
flagged as suspicious.
• Uniform Distribution: When data is uniformly spread across a range,
extreme values are not necessarily anomalies. Instead, anomalies may
appear as regions with unexpectedly high or low density compared to the
rest of the range. For example, when a uniform sensor reads a sudden
gap or spike in measurements, that could be a signal error.
• Other Unimodal Distributions:
For skewed or bounded distribu-
tions (e.g., log-normal or Gamma), anomalies are identified by compar-
ing observed tail frequencies with those predicted by the distribution.
In this way, it is possible to find a thresholds beyond which a relatively
small number (1%) of the data points are found. For example, a group
of values in the extreme right tail of a log-normal income distribution
may indicate potential fraud or exceptional wealth.
• Multimodal Distributions:
In many real-world datasets, multiple
modes or clusters exist. Here, the norm is not a single mean but a set
of clusters. Anomalies are data points that lie outside all clusters or
at a larger distance compared to the cluster density. For example, in
Cyber Security network traﬀic, normal behavior might cluster around
common protocols, while unusual patterns outside these clusters may
signal intrusion attempts.
• Time-Series Data: When one of the dimensions is time, anomalies can
be defined as deviations from expected temporal patterns. For instance,
a sudden spike in electricity consumption at night, or a transaction at
an unusual time for a user, can both be considered anomalies.
So far, anomaly detection is tied to the understanding of the initial distri-
bution. But, what if we want to find possible anomalies in a dataset where
the original data distributions is not known a priori?
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Extreme Value Theory
17
3.2
Extreme Value Theory
An anomaly can be seen as any observation that does not follow the expected
statistical or structural pattern of the data.
However, in many real-world
contexts such as anomaly detection in marine environment, it is common to
deal with ocean variables (temperature, salinity) or biochemical parameters
(acidity, chlorophyll concentration) where true distribution is unknown a priori
or location-dependent.
That is because most of the time they are events
rarely recorded (as tidal waves) so it is practically impossible to establish a
pattern cause since the occuring of the event their probability to happen is
equal to zero. At this point, it becomes impractical to assume a general law
for the data.
In these cases, anomalies can be better understood through
the statistical theory of extremes, known as Extreme Value Theory (EVT) [6].
EVT provides results that describe the distribution of rare and extreme events
independently of the underlying distribution, in a way analogous to the Central
Limit Theorem (CLT).
3.2.1
Extreme Value Distributions
The goal of extreme value theory is to find a law of extreme events. Mathemat-
ically, given a random variable X and its cumulative distribution function F
whose the distribution pattern is not known. The probability that an extreme
event (an outlier) occurs is F(X) = P(X ≤x).
Thanks to the results of Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko, given n independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables {Xi}n
i=1 with cumulative dis-
tribution function (CDF) F(x). The maximum
Mn = max{X1, . . . , Xn}.
is likely to follow a Extreme Value Distributions (EVD). For example, the
distributions of the maximum of temperature and the maximum of salinity
have more or less the same distribution even if their distributions are not the
same. The Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko theorem states that the distributions of
these extreme laws belongs to the Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) family:
Gγ(x) = exp
{
−(1 + γx)−1/γ}
,
1 + γx > 0.
To understand this formula intuitively, we can imagine that for most distribu-
tions the probability of an event to happen decrease when events are extreme
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Scientific Background
P(X > x) →0. The tail of a distribution F(x) is given by:
F(x) = 1 −F(X) = P(X > x)
Therefore, the GEV is trying to fit the tail distribution.
There are not many possible tail shapes and the parameter γ ∈R is the
extreme value index (EVI) and determines the tail type.
• γ > 0: heavy-tailed (Fréchet domain, e.g. Pareto, Cauchy).
• γ = 0: exponential-tailed (Gumbel domain, e.g. Gaussian, exponential).
• γ < 0: bounded tail (Weibull domain, e.g. uniform, beta).
This universality means that extremes can be modeled without explicit knowl-
edge of F(x), which is especially powerful when F is complex or unknown.
3.2.2
Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) Method
While block maxima (e.g. annual maxima of temperature in a location) lead to
the GEV distribution, a more data-eﬀicient approach is to focus on threshold
exceedances. Let t be a high threshold. The conditional excess distribution is
Ft(x) = P(X −t ≤x | X > t).
The Pickands–Balkema–de Haan theorem shows that, for large t, this condi-
tional law is well approximated by the Generalized Pareto Distribution
(GPD):
Ft(x) ≈1 −
(
1 + γx
σ
)−1/γ
,
x > 0,
where γ is the extreme value index and σ > 0 is a scale parameter.
From this model, extreme quantiles can be estimated. If n is the total
number of observation and Nt the number of exceedances above t, the quantile
zq corresponding to exceedance probability q is:
zq ≈t + ˆσ
ˆγ
[(qn
Nt
)−ˆγ
−1
]
.
The GPD parameters (γ, σ) can be estimated via different methods [6]:
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Extreme Value Theory
19
• Method of Moments (MOM).
• Probability Weighted Moments (PWM).
• Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), preferred in practice.
MLE, that is the most optimized method and the chosen one in this thesis,
stated that given excesses Yi = Xi −t with Xi > t, the log-likelihood is:
ℓ(γ, σ) = −Nt log σ −
(
1 + 1
γ
) Nt
∑
i=1
log
(
1 + γYi
σ
)
.
Maximizing this yields consistent estimators (ˆγ, ˆσ).
3.2.3
Anomaly Detection with EVT
The EVT through the POT approach gives us the estimation of the threshold
without knowing its distribution. Once the threshold zq is computed, anoma-
lies are defined as points Xi such that:
Xi > zq,
with P(X > zq) < q.
The parameter q acts as a risk level, directly controlling the expected false pos-
itive rate. For example, setting q = 10−3 means that, under normal conditions,
fewer than 0.1% of observations are expected to exceed zq.
3.2.4
Streaming EVT: SPOT and DSPOT
In practice, anomalies often need to be detected in real time on data streams.
Siffer et al. [4] propose the SPOT and DSPOT algorithms:
• SPOT (Streaming Peaks-Over-Threshold): Uses an initial calibra-
tion batch to set t and fit a GPD. Continuously updates the threshold
zq as new peaks arrive. Flags anomalies when Xi > zq. Requires sta-
tionarity of the underlying distribution.
• DSPOT (Drift SPOT): Extends SPOT to handle non-stationary data
(concept drift). Models local average behavior with a moving window
Mi, and applies POT on residuals X′
i = Xi −Mi. Adaptive to trends,
seasonality, or slow drifts common in physical measurements.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Scientific Background
3.2.5
Properties
EVT provides several benefits for anomaly detection:
• Distribution independence: No need to assume Gaussianity or para-
metric forms.
• Risk-based control: Explicit link between false alarm probability q
and threshold zq.
• Scalability: SPOT/DSPOT update thresholds online with low memory
cost (store only exceedances).
• Interpretability: Thresholds correspond to extreme quantiles, allow-
ing domain experts (e.g. oceanographers) to define safety margins.
In conclusion, EVT shifts anomaly detection from dependence on the full
data distribution to a focus on the tails, providing a robust mathematical tool
to detect and quantify rare extreme events.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
System Design and
Architecture
This chapter presents the overall architecture and design strategy used to im-
plement, package, and deploy the anomaly detection service developed in this
thesis. It analyzes the main software components backend and frontend logic,
RestAPI, containerization, deployment tools and how they interact to form
a reproducible service architecture.
The architecture decisions were made
having in mind scalability, modularity and reproducibility within the infras-
tructure. In addition, the chapter describes the adaptation of modern software
engineering practices such as container orchestration and continuous delivery
to the platform core infrastructure.
4.1
Solution Architecture
The anomaly detection tool developed in this thesis is designed and imple-
mented as a full-stack web application. It consists of a Python based backed
API built with the FastAPI framework, a React based frontend interface and
a containerized deployment architecture using Docker, Helm and Kubernetes.
This full-stack design enables direct interaction with the anomaly detection
engine via both API calls and a user-friendly interface exposed within the
EDITO platform.
Deploying a service on EDITO requires more than simply running code in
a container. It involves managing the full lifecycle of the application, from
local development to platform deployment, and eventually integration into the
digital twin ecosystem.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 System Design and Architecture
Figure 4.1. Application Lifecycle applied in this project: from packaging to moni-
toring.
To support this, the project adopts a structure approach inspired by the
Application Lifecycle Management (ALM) methodology.
ALM is the management of software applications from ‘cradle to grave’—
from conception and development through deployment, revisions, maintenance
and eventually retirement. [7]. The process is an Agile methodology to en-
able teams to collaborate among them and create visibility to all the project
stakeholders to deliver a well rounded and tested software [8] (to read the
agile manifesto please refer to appendix B). ALM covers the entire lifecycle
from the idea, through the development, testing and deployment. While tra-
ditional ALM tools (e.g., Jira, GitLab CI/CD pipelines, unit testing suites)
are commonly used in software teams, the EDITO platform imposes addi-
tional constraints: services must be portable, secure, and executable within
a Kubernetes-controlled container space. The project is based on two main
repository. One repository, the Anomaly detection Repository, where all the
backend and frontend code is organized, and the Gitlab Service Playground
repository which contains the codebase for the deployment configuration for
Helm on EDITO. Service Playground is used for testing purpose while the
Service Helm Charts is the reserved for production deployment.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 CI/CD Pipeline Requirements
23
4.2
CI/CD Pipeline Requirements
Even if in this project there was no team involved, a basic continous delivery
pipeline was designed to ensure the service could be updated and redeployed
in a reliable way. The pipeline follows the approach of Continuous Integration
and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD), indeed, every time a new change is pushed
into the main code, the GitHub repository automatically pushes the changes
in the container and make them ready to be pulled by EDITO.
Figure 4.2. Simplification model of the EDITO’s Pipeline.
4.2.1
Packaging
The packaging phase contains three main components: external repositories
(link to the public repository, Anomalies Detection), building server and pub-
lishing server. To package the code that calculates the anomalies, it is impor-
tant to build an API and make it ready and accessible from the internet. An
Application User Interface (API) is a set of rules or protocols that enables soft-
ware applications to communicate with each other to exchange data, features
and functionality [7]. The most common operations an user can do with an
API, in particular with a RestAPI architecture, are to retrieve data from the
server (GET), update or replace data (PUT), create a new resource or submit
data (POST), remove a resource (DELETE). The anomaly detection logic is
encapsulated in a RESTful API using FastAPI, tested using local JSON pay-
loads and HTTP responses.
FastAPI is a modern Python web framework used for servicing APIs [9].
FastAPI also has many user-friendly features like generating API Swagger
==PAGE:34==
24
4 System Design and Architecture
documentation automatically and supporting features like request validation.
Furthermore, it also support the handling of different types of user errors and
the validation is supported by the Pydantic library [10]. Pydantic enables
user to define inputs and outputs schemas, data types and validation rules.
Its main role is to convert and parsing various data formats into Python ob-
jects.
The use of Pydantic models ensured strict input validation before entering
the core anomaly detection logic, minimizing runtime bugs.
After the model is reachable over the internet through FastAPI, it has to
be packaged in a docker container. The API is containerized using Docker.
Docker is an open-source platform designed to automate the deployment
and distribution of applications inside lightweight, portable containers [11].
A Docker container packages all necessary components of an application—
including its code, runtime, libraries’ versions, and system tools and resources
into a single isolated unit. This ensures that the application runs consistently
across different computing environments, regardless of the underlying operat-
ing system or system dependencies. In the context of this project, Docker was
used to encapsulate both the backend FastAPI service and the React-based
frontend interface. This approach simplifies development, testing, and deploy-
ment by eliminating environment-specific inconsistencies and reducing manual
configuration steps. the docker containers were first tested locally and then
deployed on ghcr (Github Container Registry) with public access. GHCR is
a service offered by GitHub which stores container images and allow the user
to associate an image with the repository. In this way, it can be possible to
implement an automatic pipeline to update the container images every time
some new changes are pushed in the repository.
4.3
Deployment technology stack
The technology stack used to configure and deploy the anomaly detection ser-
vice on the EDITO platform involves Docker, Kubernetes, Helm and Onyxia.
4.3.1
Kubernetes
Kubernetes is an open source container orchestration platform designed to
automate the deployment, scaling, and management of containerized appli-
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Deployment technology stack
25
cations. Originally developed by Google and now maintained by the Cloud
Native Computing Foundation (CNCF), Kubernetes abstracts the underly-
ing infrastructure and provides a unified API for managing container lifecy-
cles [12].
Within a Kubernetes cluster, applications are deployed as groups of con-
tainers called pods, which are scheduled across compute nodes based on re-
source availability and user-defined configurations. Kubernetes handles service
discovery, load balancing, fault tolerance, and automated rollouts, making it
well-suited for cloud-native and scalable software architectures.
In this project, Kubernetes is the orchestration engine that underpins the
EDITO platform. All services, including the anomaly detection API, are de-
ployed as Kubernetes pods, governed by configuration manifests and Helm
charts. In the case of the anomaly detection model two pods were deployed,
one for front-end and one for back-end, each of them packaged in their contain-
ers, respectively, as mentioned earlier. The use of Kubernetes ensures that
services can be restarted automatically upon failure, scaled dynamically, and
securely isolated from other processes in the shared EDITO environment.
4.3.2
Helm
Helm is the oﬀicial package manager for Kubernetes, designed to streamline
the deployment and management of applications through a templating system
called charts. A Helm chart is a structured directory containing metadata,
configuration templates, and default values that describe how to install and
run a Kubernetes application [12].
By separating static configuration logic from runtime parameters, Helm
allows developers to maintain reusable deployment templates while customiz-
ing service behavior through a centralized ‘values.yaml‘ file. This abstraction
significantly reduces complexity and human error when deploying to different
environments.
In this thesis, Helm was used to define and deploy the anomaly detection
service.
The Helm chart specifies the container image, CPU and memory
resource limits, exposed ports, environment variables and declaring the host-
name url. Deployment was first tested in the EDITO Service Playground and
later adapted for integration with the production infrastructure. Helm’s mod-
ularity and consistency were essential for aligning with EDITO’s deployment
requirements, especially in a controlled multi-user environment managed by
Onyxia.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 System Design and Architecture
4.3.3
Onyxia
The whole EDITO’s GUI is built on top of Onyxia Datalab, an open-source
orchestration interface that abstracts the complexity of Kubernetes for end
users [13]. Onyxya is the top level abstraction of the technology stack. Onyxia
provides the graphical interface through which services like the anomaly de-
tection model are deployed, configured, and managed. When a user launches
a service, Onyxia dynamically generates and submits Kubernetes manifests
based on parameters defined in the associated Helm chart and exposed in the
UI.
Onyxia handles session isolation, volume mounting, user authentication,
and secure access to secrets—such as API tokens or SSH keys—while also
exposing runtime logs and environment variables. This makes it easier for de-
velopers and scientists to deploy reproducible containerized workflows without
needing deep knowledge of Kubernetes internals. At its core Onyxia is a web
UI that turns a helm chart repo into a catalog of services.
In this project, Onyxia played a critical role in enabling the real-time vali-
dation of the service: by launching the containerized API within the Datalab
via the Onyxia UI, the developer could configure input parameters, monitor
container status, and interact with the application directly through the web
interface or Swagger-generated API docs.
4.4
Monitoring and Validation:
The deployed service is accessed through EDITO’s GUI. Runtime errors and
logs are monitored through the Kubernetes dashboard (when available) or
through terminal access inside EDITO’s Datalab. According to the parameters
previously declared in the Helm Chart is possible to specify the inputs through
the Datalab’s UI. Possible inputs example available in EDITO are:
• Container specifications. Specify which container has to be pulled. There
can be cases where in a service there can be different pods or simply dif-
ferent versions of the same container.
• Image pull policy: Image pull policy can be set to Always, Never, IfNot-
Present. Remember that it is important to pull a fresh container from
the container registry if it was updated without the creation of a new
version. Not having a pull policy could cause to not re-use the version
present on the machine without getting the new updates.
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Data Flow
27
• Security: It is possible to insert credentials for services like Copernicus
Marine or local S3 storage. If credentials are available, it means that
the container is retrieving data from an external API and needs authen-
tication. Also, the container might need credentials to be pulled, hence
a password must be input.
• HPC: EDITO can access an external HPC center such as LUMI or
MareNostrum via SSH keys inputs managed by Onyxia.
• Resources: Tuning the resources for a service by specifying the amount
of CPU and memory guaranteed.
4.5
Data Flow
To sum up, there are two distinct data flow in EDITO: the anomaly detection
service and the infrastructure level data flow.
At the user level, the flow begins when input parameters—typically in
JSON format—are submitted either through the Swagger UI or via the React-
based frontend interface (depending on which container is being triggered by
the user). The input is then validated and processed by the FastAPI backend.
The backend applies the anomaly detection logic, generates outputs, and re-
turns a structured response to the frontend or user.
From a platform perspective, the deployment and execution of the services
are governed by a layered stack made of Onyxya at the top layer. Onyxia
provides the web-based interface, for launching the service. It reads the Helm
chart of the service selected by the user. Helm will then generates the Ku-
bernetes configurations which are then used to schedule the container into
a compute node within the EDITO cluster. Docker, at the bottom layer of
the stack, provides the runtime environments for the application.
4.5.1
Data Lake
In addition to the data supplied through direct file uploads or user inputs,
EDITO services can access and process datasets retrieved from the EDITO
Data Lake.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 System Design and Architecture
The Data Lake is a repository leveraging the development of high-speed
and scalable Cloud based storage solutions and it can be access through a
public API. Key endpoints include:
• /collections: Retrieve the list of available scientific variables.
• /collections/{collectionId}: Access metadata for a specific collec-
tion.
• /collections/{collectionId}/items: Query all items within a collec-
tion.
• /search: Search items across all collections using spatial filters (e.g.,
coordinates bounding boxes), catalog keywords, or owner metadata.
Edito’s Data Lake architecture is built on the principles of SpatioTemporal
Asset Catalog (STAC) and OGC API features standards. The STAC system
enables querying across spatial, temporal and thematic dimensions figure, 4.3.
Figure 4.3. The SpatioTemporal Asset Catalog (STAC) structure of the data lake
API.
Apart reading existing data, the API also allows users to push their own
metadata and register new datasets. These assets can then be automatically
linked to EDITO Datalab services (e.g., Jupyter Notebooks, Data Explorer),
creating a seamless loop between data generation, analysis, and publication.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Backend
Implementation
This chapter documents the backend of the ocean anomaly detection service,
implemented on Pyhton using the FastAPI framework. It describes the struc-
ture of the codebase, the main computational logic and how the backend in-
tegrates with the whole system according to the architectural decisions of the
previous chapters. The main scope of this chapter is to grant the necessary
technical documentation that can enable the developer user to understand
and make the new changes available for EDITO. The backend is container-
ized and hosted on GitHub Container Registry (GHCR), enabling continuous
deployment within the platform. The entities discussed in this chapter are
implemented in the backend folder of the AnomalyDetection repository.
Figure 5.1. Folder structure of the anomaly detection model backend.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Backend Implementation
5.1
API Structure
The backend code follows an Object Oriented Programming (OOP) design in
order to make it open to modification and easily scalable. The main entry
point is the ada_api.py. This file wraps up the logic for developing the API.
The first step to create an API is to declare its instance.
1 app = FastAPI(root_path="/api")
Listing 5.1. FastAPI instance
After the app variable is instantiated, several endpoints are defined and ex-
posed to external users. The anomaly API is composed of the following end-
points.
Method
Endpoints
Inputs
POST
/run_pipeline_anomalies/classic
params: PipelineParams
POST
/run_pipeline_anomalies/pot
params: PipelineParams
GET
/show_image
-
GET
/get_stats
-
Table 5.1. Available API endpoints for anomaly detection.
In table 5.1, the first two POST endpoints are used to trigger the anomaly
detection calculation pipeline, using different methods (Classic and POT). The
user must first input the data that are then validated by the Pydantic library
base model into runtime rules for the code. The input JSON object has to
match the ‘PipelineParams‘ Pydantic model:
1 class PipelineParams(BaseModel):
2
dataset: str
3
starting_time: str
4
variable : str
5
max_lon : float
6
min_lon : float
7
max_lat : float
8
min_lat : float
This model defines the spatial and temporal boundaries of the anomaly
detection request, as well as the input variable (e.g., sea temperature or salin-
ity).
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Anomaly Detection logic
31
Another endpoint that was not listed in table 5.1 is the root endpoint ‘/‘ which
is used to check whether the API is returning the 200 OK code at the base url,
meaning the API is running correctly. The different endpoints of a RestAPI
usually follow the structure https://BASE_URL/endpoint. The root endpoint
is composed just of the base url and it is particularly useful when testing the
Docker container or deploying the service within Kubernetes. Indeed, it is the
first endpoint the container calls for health check.
When an endpoint is triggered, it returns a response. Table 5.2 summarizes
the most common HTTP response codes handled by the API.
Requests Codes
Detail
200
Good Request - The server received all the inputs cor-
rectly and it run the specific endpoint.
400
Bad Request – The server could not understand the
request due to invalid syntax.
401
Unauthorized – Authentication credentials are missing
or invalid.
403
Forbidden – Invalid API key or insuﬀicient permis-
sions.
404
Not Found – Data for the provided DeviceId or data
range not found.
500
Internal Server Error – The server encountered an un-
expected condition.
Table 5.2. Common API error codes and their details.
5.2
Anomaly Detection logic
When the user initiates a POST request from the frontend, the selected
anomaly detection method (Classic or POT) is passed as part of the API
call. The backend initializes the core class ‘AnomalyDetection‘, passing in
the relevant user parameters: dataset, starting time,location, variable (e.g.
salinity, temperature).
From the dataset information, the ‘AnomalyDetec-
tion‘ class is checking whether the climatology is already computed for the
selected coordinates. A climatology is a 12-layer xarray dataset represent-
ing the monthly average over all historical years available in the database. If
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Backend Implementation
the climatology is not already precomputed in the docker for that particular
database, the CopernicusFetcher class is used to download the historical data
and compute the monthly means climatology. Once the climatology is saved,
the daily oceanographic data for the selected year and variable are retrieved
from the appropriate dataset. For example, using the database ”Global Ocean
Physics Reanalysis” [14], which has a time extent spanning from 1st of Jan-
uary 1993 to the 01st of June 2021, the baseline climatology is computed by
calculating the average of all the months (all the Januaries, all the Februaries,
etc.) grouped together.
1
def ClimatologyCalculation(self, baseline , dataset ,
variable='thetao'):
2
# compute the mean across the 'time' dimension
3
climatology = baseline.groupby("time.month").mean("
time", skipna=True)
4
climatology = climatology.squeeze()
5
climatology = climatology[variable]
6
da4d = dataset[variable]
7
8
return da4d, climatology
Listing 5.2.
Climatology caluclation computed by the ClimatologyCalculation
function.
The daily oceanographic data for the selected year are then retrieved from
the same database. CMEMS dataset identifiers typically encode their tempo-
ral resolution, so switching between monthly and daily data can be done by
replacing the final “M” with “D”. For example, the monthly reanalysis product
cmems_mod_glo_phy_my_0.083deg_P1M-m corresponds to its daily counter-
part cmems_mod_glo_phy_my_0.083deg_P1D-m. This design allows the back-
end to automatically adapt the data source depending on the selected analysis
period or user request. The AnomaliesDetection class is then used to calculate
the statistical threshold based on one of the method selected. The classical
method or the POT method described in chapter 3. Once the statistical thresh-
old is computed and saved, the tool can compute a baseline climatology and
compare any year (e.g., 2023) against it. Any exceedance is classified as an
anomaly. The plot will be generated and saved in the results folder, figure 5.1.
Instead, the get_stats endpoint is loading the threshold file previously com-
puted and stored in the results folder. A typical output from the ‘/get_stats‘
endpoint looks like:
1
{
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Anomaly Detection logic
33
2
"Status": "ok",
3
"Statistics": {
4
"Max Anomalies Gap [°C]": 2.3,
5
"Max Anomalies [°C]": 3.1,
6
"Intensity [°C/Days]": 12.7,
7
"Mean Temperature [°C]": 16.4
8
}
9 }
Each output has a precise definition, having Dd as daily value and Td as the
daily threshold:
• Max Anomalies Gap: max(Dd −Td), where Dd > Td. The greatest
exceedance over the threshold.
• Max Anomalies: maxd Dd, the absolute maximum temperature or
salinity observed during the anomaly period.
• Intensity: Integrated anomaly across time, defined as ∑(Dd −Td) in
°C·days.
• Mean Temperature: Average temperature over the selected spatial-
temporal domain, for baseline comparison.
The API also exposes the endpoint /show_image, which returns a plot
of the detected anomalies. The figure is generated using Matplotlib, where
the x-axis represents the days for the selected year (it always includes leap
years), and the y-axis shows the values of the selected variable. Anomalies
points exceeding the threshold are marked in red, while the baseline threshold
curve is shown for reference. Since the climatological threshold is computed
as a monthly average (i.e., 12 values per year), it must be interpolated to
daily resolution in order to compare it against daily observations. To execute
this interpolation, each threshold variable are assigned to occur exactly on
the middle day of each month (e.g., day 15 for January, day 46 for February,
etc.). The array is then extended at both ends to avoid boundary artifacts
and ensure smooth interpolation:
1
threshold = threshold.mean(dim=('latitude','longitude'))
2
mid_month_day = [15, 46, 74, 105, 135, 166, 196, 227,
258, 288, 319, 349]
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Backend Implementation
3
extended_days = np.concatenate(([mid_month_day[-1] -
365], mid_month_day , [mid_month_day[0] + 365]))
4
extended_values = np.concatenate(([threshold[-1]],
threshold , [threshold[0]]))
The interpolation is then applied across all days of the year using standard
numpy interpolation routines. The resulting daily threshold curve is plotted
together with the observed daily data, and the anomalies are clearly visible
as red markers above the threshold like in figure 5.2
Figure 5.2. Plot Anomaly Detection for the selected year 2023. In the plot some
anomalies occurred during the firt days of 2023 are highlighted in red.
The final image is saved in the results/ folder of the container and served
through a GET request.
The backend code is easily extendable. Adding new variables or detection
techniques only requires appending a new method to the core class or inte-
grating new preprocessing logic within the modular structure.
5.2.1
Important Libraries
The backend relies on the following key libraries. Here a summary of the most
important library used in the codebase.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Anomaly Detection logic
35
• FastAPI: Lightweight modern framework for building REST APIs in
Python. Supports auto-generated Swagger documentation and Pydantic-
based validation.
• Pydantic: Provides robust input validation and type-checking for in-
coming requests. Used to define the API schemas (e.g., PipelineParams).
• Xarray: Handles multi-dimensional arrays and is ideal for NetCDF
style climate data. It is the core library used to compute climatologies
and anomalies throughout this work. When a NetCDF file is opened
with xarray.open_dataset, it is represented as an xarray.Dataset
which contains multiple DataArray objects. Each variable within the
dataset (e.g. temperature, salinity) is stored as a DataArray, together
with shared coordinate variables such as time, latitude, longitude,
and depth.
The Dataset structure allows simultaneous access to all
variables and their associated metadata.
In this project, the computations are generally performed on a single
variable at a time (e.g. thetao, representing sea water potential temper-
ature). The variable is extracted as a DataArray:
1 import xarray as xr
2 ds = xr.open_dataset("dataset.nc")
3 temperature = ds["thetao"]
# sea water potential
temperature
Listing 5.3. Opening a NetCDF file with Xarray
The resulting DataArray retains coordinate dimensions and metadata
attributes such as units, valid ranges, and long names.
An example
output is shown below, where each DataArray includes coordinates for
latitude, longitude, depth, and time (or month when computing the
mean for the climatology), as well as attributes describing the variable:
1 <xarray.DataArray 'thetao' (month: 12, depth: 1,
latitude: 61, longitude: 61)>
2 array([[[[13.010804, ..., 13.943022], ..., [nan, ...,
19.422926]]], ...])
3 Coordinates:
4
* depth
(depth)
float32 0.494
5
* latitude
(latitude)
float32 -46.0 ... -41.0
6
* longitude
(longitude)
float32 145.1 ... 150.0
7
* month
(month)
int64 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 12
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Backend Implementation
8 Attributes:
9
units
: degrees_C
10
long_name
: Temperature
11
unit_long
: Degrees Celsius
12
standard_name: sea_water_potential_temperature
This type of structure enables expressive operations such as slicing, ag-
gregation, and statistical reduction:
1 # Select a geographic subset and time slice
2 subset = ds.sel(
3
time=slice("2022-01-01", "2022-12-31"),
4
latitude=slice(40, 50),
5
longitude=slice(-10, 0)
6 )
7
8 # Compute monthly climatology
9 climatology = subset.groupby("time.month").mean("time")
By combining all these features, the Xarray provides the same conve-
nience as working with a pandas dataframe but with the advantage to
storing different variables.
• Dask: Dask is used when working with high-resolution or multi-year
oceanographic datasets (like the climatology). it prevents to download
the entire datasets into memory, instead it allows Xarray to operates
on them as chunks. This can inproves scalability and performance on
operations like computing climatology, averaging or filtering.
• NumPy: Core numerical computation library, used for array opera-
tions.
• Matplotlib: Used for visualizing anomalies and generating plots for
download.
• Uvicorn: ASGI web server used to run the FastAPI app locally and in
production.
• Copernicus Marine API tools (custom): Used for fetching data
from the Copernicus Marine Service (CMEMS). Find an example of
how the class is structured in appendix C.1
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Error Handling and Validation
37
These libraries were selected to balance computational performance, sim-
plicity, and integration with scientific data formats commonly used in the
marine community.
5.3
Error Handling and Validation
Validation is enforced at two levels:
1. Request Schema Validation: Pydantic automatically checks that all
fields in PipelineParams are present and of the correct type (e.g., float,
str). Missing or incorrect fields return a 400 Bad Request.
2. Runtime Exception Handling: Try/except blocks are used through-
out the core logic to catch issues such as:
• Invalid dataset names or date ranges
• Missing files or corrupt data
• API connection issues (e.g., Copernicus fetch failures)
Meaningful error messages are returned to help the user diagnose problems,
and all errors are logged for debugging purposes. In addition, a developer
user could verify the status code of each endpoints when run in production by
accessing the network console of the selected browser.
5.4
Local Testing
To test the API before the deployment, the anomaly detection service can be
run locally in two main ways: using the Python FastAPI development server
or through Docker.
The simplest way to run the API while developing is via the FastAPi de-
velopment server uvicorn. From the root of the backend, after making sure
to install all the necessary packages, run:
1 uvicorn ada_api:app --reload --port 8000
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Backend Implementation
This will launch the API at http://localhost:8000. The Swagger UI doc-
umentation will be available at /docs endpoint.
It is also an option and
strongly recommended to disable the swagger documentation before deploy-
ment in production.
To test the containerized version locally instead, after opening your docker
Desktop application, build and run the Docker image in the root backend
folder:
1 docker build -t anomaly -api .
2 docker run -p 8000:8000 anomaly -api
This exposes the same API endpoints and documentation on http://localhost:8000.
It is the preferred testing mode before deploying to EDITO, since it mirrors
the production environment.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Frontend Exposure
and Integration
This chapter document the frontend of the ocean anomaly detection service,
implemented on React using the Vite build tool. Like the previous chapter,
it outlines the main structure of the codebase and explains how the differ-
ent components interact with each others and with the backend. The fron-
tend serves to provide an interactive web interface for end users to configure
the anomaly detection pipeline and visualize the results exposed via the API.
Likewise the backend, also the frontend image are hosted on GHCR. The en-
tities discussed in this chapter are implemented in frontend/src folder of the
AnomalyDetection GitHub repository.
Figure 6.1. Folder structure of the anomaly detection model frontend.
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Frontend Exposure and Integration
6.1
React and Vite Overview
React is a popular JavaScript library for building modular and component-
based user interfaces. It allows developers to create reusable UI components
that automatically update when the application state changes. On react is
possible to create individual pieces called components and then combine them
to form screen, pages and apps. In this project, React was chosen for its flex-
ibility, simplicity, and strong ecosystem [15].
To bootstrap the React application, the project uses Vite, a modern frontend
build tool that aims to provide a faster and leaner development experience
for modern web projects. It provides a fast build and easy integration for
JavaScript libraries and backend APIs.
To run the application locally for development, the following command is
used inside the frontend root folder:
1 npm install
2 npm run dev
The build process relies on Node Package Manager (npm) to compose the
whole code and render the webiste.
By default, Vite runs the application
at http://localhost:5173, and the app connects to the backend API the
configured endpoints.
If also the backend application is running locally is
important to set on react the base url to match the http://localhost:8000.
6.2
React Components Architecture
The frotend code is organized into modular components within the src folder.
Each component handles a specific part of the user interface or logic. The
main components are:
• App.tsx: This is the root component. It renders the full interface and
manages the overall application state. It imports and renders all the key
parts like the interactive map, the sidebar menu, and the backend API
calls. It’s basically where everything comes together.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 React Components Architecture
41
• css folder: This folder collects all the CSS files used to style the ap-
plication. CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) is used to control the layout,
colors, spacing, and general visual presentation of the interface.
• components/maps.tsx: This component is used to initialize and render
the map using MapLibre API. At the moment, it’s a static map centered
around the selected region, initialized at latitude and longitude zero.
• components/Sidebar.tsx: This is where all the user inputs are col-
lected. It includes all the form elements that let the user specify the
dataset, variable, date, and the bounding box. It’s responsible for send-
ing the selected parameters back to the parent component (‘App.tsx‘)
when the ”Run” button is clicked.
• service/api.ts: This is a small service file that handles the HTTP
requests. It builds and sends the POST request to trigger the anomaly
detection pipeline and fetches the result image and statistics afterward.
The code is easy to scale. If a user needs to add more variables, a different
visualization, or even another type of statistical method, it’s just a matter of
updating or adding the right component. The structure is flexible enough to
handle extensions without touching the full codebase.
The frontend is also packaged as a Docker image, just like the backend. The
difference is that this time an NGINX server is used to serve the static frontend
files properly. The Dockerfile for this setup is slightly different (it builds the
Vite project and then serves it via NGINX), but the commands to build and
run it are basically the same. For reproducibility, I’ve added the full Dockerfile
and run commands in appendix A.1
6.2.1
Component Communication
The UI logic in React is state-driven using React’s built in useState() and
useEffect() hooks. User inputs are collected through form elements in the
app.tsx, and upon clicking the run button an HTTP POST request is sent to ei-
ther /run_pipeline_anomalies/classic or /run_pipeline_anomalies/pot.
Once the request completes, the frontend triggers a GET request to fetch the
image and the statistics.
The separation of responsibilities across components allows for better main-
tainability and extensibility. For instance, adding new input parameters or
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Frontend Exposure and Integration
new types of visualizations would only require changes in the corresponding
component.
6.3
Frontend UI Design
The interface is designed to be very intuitive in its use.
Thanks to react
reactivity, API integration and the computation eﬀiciency of the EDITO cloud
infrastructure, results are shown with minimal latency after submission.
Figure 6.2. Dashboard at the startup page
When the container is started, the default landing page is a single-page
dashboard, as shown in figure 6.2. This web app is a static frontend, meaning
there is no navigation to different pages or routes; the entire interaction hap-
pens on a single view using dynamic rendering. On the left the sidebar allows
the user to:
• Select a region by drawing a bounding box on the interactive map (pow-
ered by MapLibre),
• Choose a dataset and a variable from the dropdown menu.
• Select an algorithm: Classic or POT.
• Pick a year for the anomaly computation.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Frontend UI Design
43
Once a dataset is selected, the frontend will automatically fetch and display
some dataset features to guide the user inputs. If invalid inputs are provided
(e.g., dates outside the dataset range or an incomplete form), an error message
is shown immediately (usually a 500 internal server errors), without needing
to submit.
Once all parameters are correctly selected, the ”Run” button becomes click-
able. When triggered, it sends the request to the backend and waits for a
response. If successful, the interface will update to show the anomaly plot
image and the statistical summary. If any issue occurs during the request, the
API response code will be displayed clearly in the frontend, for example 404 if
the backend is unreachable (container did not start correctly) and 500 if there
is an internal server error (e.g. , computation failed). Other codes are defined
in section 5.1.
The goal of this design was to keep everything on a single screen, making
the tool simple to use and easy to maintain. All components are reactive, and
the user is never redirected to a new page, the entire experience is handled
within the same view.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 7
Deployment Strategy
This chapter describes in detail the deployment strategy adopted for the ocean
anomaly detection service. The first pipeline focuses on pushing the container-
izing backend and frontend code into the Github Container Registry (GHCR),
a critical step to ensure that the service is reproducible, version controlled and
ready for remote deployment. While the second pipeline explains how the ser-
vice is deployed on the EDITO platform using the Helm charts and Kubernetes
configuration. The goal is to ensure that each update to the codebase (either
frontend or backend) can be built, tested, and deployed with minimal manual
steps. This is particularly important in the EDITO ecosystem, which imposes
strict requirements on container structure, ingress configuration, and compute
resource allocation.
The following sections break down these two deployment flows, the com-
mands used, how the Helm configuration was written, and how the service
was finally published and tested inside EDITO Datalab.
The deployment
pipeline for the anomaly detection service can be found in the branch named
after it of the project Service Playground at: https://gitlab.mercator-
ocean.fr/pub/edito-infra.
7.1
Service Dockerization
After the packaging phase, both backend and the frontend dockers are pushed
in the GHCR. GHCR allows easy integration into CI/CD pipelines.
To automate the publishing process, a GitHub Actions workflow is used. The
workflow configuration .yaml file must be placed inside the .github/workflows/
folder of the repository. This workflow triggers on changes to the main branch
and builds and pushes the container images to GHCR automatically, removing
the need for manual intervention. The main commands that it needs are:
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Helm Charts and Kubernetes Integration
45
1
docker build -f backend/Dockerfile backend -t ghcr.io/
dariodtu/anomalies_detection_backend:1.0.0
2
3
docker push ghcr.io/dariodtu/
anomalies_detection_backend:1.0.0
Make sure to guarantee access to the GitHub repository through the com-
mand, "docker login" (please refer to appendix D.1 for the full pipeline). It
might be relevant to set up a GitHub secret to avoid hardcoding your repos-
itory password on the GitHub pipeline. Find a full guide at Use Secrets on
the GitHub documentations for workflows.
After the image is pushed, it’s important to set the container visibility to
public within the GitHub Packages settings. Instead, for private images, it
is possible to configure access using authentication tokens or SSH keys. How-
ever, for the purpose of this prototype, the image was made public to simplify
testing and integration in EDITO.
Every time the platform pulls an image it will point to a remote link following
this naming pattern:
1 ghcr.io/<GITHUB_USERNAME >/<REPOSITORY_NAME >:<VERSION_TAG >
Versioning is essential to keep track of changes, ensuring reproducibility, and
allowing rollback to a previous release if needed. It is strongly advised to adopt
a semantic versioning scheme (e.g., 1.0.0, 1.1.0, 2.0.0) for both backend
and frontend containers. At the moment, both the dockers are set on version
1.0.0.
7.2
Helm Charts and Kubernetes Integration
Helm is a package manager for Kubernetes. A Helm chart is a collection of
files that describe a set of Kubernetes resources and how they should be con-
figured and deployed. In the context of this project, Helm is used to define
and deploy the service infrastructure on the EDITO platform via the Onyxia
interface, which handles Helm execution behind the scenes.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Deployment Strategy
Each Helm Charts is made of different components:
• Chart.yaml: contains a bundle of information necessary to create an
instance of a Kubernetes application. Library charts provide useful util-
ities or functions for the chart developer. They’re included as a depen-
dency of application charts to inject those utilities and functions into
the rendering pipeline. Library charts do not define any templates and
therefore cannot be deployed. The template is defined by Onixya. It
is necessary to modify this file if a user needs to change information
such as service name, description, service logo and version number (to
be update after every modification to the chart).
• values.yaml: Define a set of default variables for the Kubernetes re-
sources. It defines settings such as image versions, service ports, ingress
options, resource requests, environment variables and ingress hostname.
When the Helm chart is running, these values can be overridden if not
explicitly specified. The values file does not follow a strict template for-
mat like the chart file. It can be filled according to the variables needed
to deploy the service. See appendix D.2
• values.schema.json: Provides a schema that validates ‘values.yaml‘
inputs. It defines the expected structure, types, and constraints for each
field (e.g., required image path, default port format, etc.), ensuring that
invalid configurations are caught before deployment. Indeed, when a
new change is pushed into the Gitlab, the Service repository runs few
pre-configured steps to verify the validity of the whole chart.
• /template: The templates folder in a Helm chart contains the Kuber-
netes manifest templates (YAML files with Helm templating syntax)
that define the resources to be created. This folder includes specifica-
tions for Deployments, Services, Ingresses, and ConfigMaps of the pod.
When you install or upgrade the chart, Helm combines these templates
with the values from values.yaml (and any overrides) to generate the
final Kubernetes components that are applied to your cluster.
On the Data Lab at the start up of a service, the platform automatically
triggers the following Helm command from the GUI:
1
helm install anomalies -detection -861001 service -
playground/anomalies -detection -f values.yaml
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Helm Charts and Kubernetes Integration
47
This command tells Helm to use the chart found in the service-playground
repository and apply the values defined in values.yaml. After the generation
of the Kubernetes manifests, it deploys it to the current Kubernetes names-
pace.
In the Kubernetes namespace there is a node with two pods deployed. One
Pod for the frontend (React UI) serving on the base ingress path ‘/‘, and an-
other backend pod (FastAPI) serving on the ‘/api‘ path. Both pod are sharing
the same ingress hostname like in figure 7.1 but are routed based on the path
variable. This will allow the frontend to access the backend pods from the
main hostname.
1
rules:
2
- host: {{ .Values.ingress.hostname | quote }}
3
http:
4
paths:
5
# frontend
6
- path: /
7
pathType: Prefix
8
backend:
9
service:
10
name: {{ $fullName }}
11
port:
12
number: {{ $frontendPort }}
13
14
# backend
15
- path: /api
16
pathType: Prefix
17
backend:
18
service:
19
name: {{ $fullName }}-backend
20
port:
21
number: {{ $backendPort }}
Listing 7.1.
Modification of the ingress on the ingress.yaml for the Kubernetes
cluster.
==PAGE:58==
48
7 Deployment Strategy
7.2.1
Kubernetes Responsibilities
Once deployed, Kubernetes handles:
• Container scheduling via its internal scheduler,
• Service discovery and routing via DNS and internal networking,
• Health checks based on readiness and liveness probes (configured au-
tomatically via EDITO’s Onyxia wrapper),
• Ingress-based exposure through an NGINX or Traefik ingress con-
troller.
On deployment, the Kubernetes cluster is composed of a node (figure 7.1). A
node is a worker machine (virtual or physical) where containers are actually
executed. You do not control the node directly, Kubernetes (via the Scheduler)
places the pod based on availability, CPU and memory.
Figure 7.1. Kubernetes Architecture containing a node with two pods deployed by
the Helm Chart.
For example, ‘frontend-pod‘ can run on ‘node-1‘ and ‘backend-pod‘ can
run on ‘node-2‘. Each pod run a docker container pulled from GHCR and it
is connected to a Service that exposes the ingress within the cluster for the
other nodes.
==PAGE:59==
7.3 Local Testing
49
A node contains a container runtime, a kubelet (to manage containers) and a
kube-proxy (to handle networking). Furthermore, a node has the role to ex-
pose the pods via internal service and routes traﬀic to them using an ingress.
To access the service, EDITO’s Kubernetes cluster uses an NGINX ingress
controller, which acts as a reverse proxy and load balancer. It sits at the edge
of the cluster, handling external HTTP requests and forwarding them to the
correct internal service.
To be complete, a Kubernetes manifest needs to have specified a deployment,
a service and an ingress. These components are usually generated in the Helm
deployment phase. If no values are assigned, then a default value is assigned
automatically from the template.
1
include "library -chart.ingress" .
However, even if you do not modify the deployment.yaml, you always need
to indicate a container in the values.yaml. Otherwise, there will not be any
containers to pull.
If all settings are correct, both containers are pulled from GHCR, launched,
and routed appropriately.
Once the containers are healthy, EDITO shows
a success message and provides a link to the frontend page. Any issues in
startup (e.g., port misconfigurations, access denied or invalid container paths)
are reported through the GUI or cluster logs.
7.3
Local Testing
Before deploying the service on EDITO, preliminary tests were performed
locally using Minikube. Since this was my first experience with Kubernetes-
based deployment, Minikube provided an accessible environment to simulate
the creation and management of pods on a small local cluster. This setup
allowed verification that the containerized service could run smoothly and
that the Kubernetes configuration files (deployment.yaml and service.yaml)
were correctly defined before deploying through Helm on EDITO.
Minikube acts as a lightweight, single-node Kubernetes cluster running locally
on the host machine. It supports the same command-line tools as a full Ku-
bernetes installation and it is the ideal environment for debugging. Through
==PAGE:60==
50
7 Deployment Strategy
this environment, I could simulate pod creation, inspect logs in real time,
and confirm that the backend container behaved as expected. The following
commands were used during the testing phase:
1 # Start a local Kubernetes cluster
2 minikube start
3
4 # Apply deployment and service manifests
5 kubectl apply -f k8s/deployment.yaml
6 kubectl apply -f k8s/service.yaml
7
8 # Monitor pod creation
9 kubectl get pods --watch
10
11 # Restart deployment after configuration changes
12 kubectl rollout restart deployment/myapi
13
14 # Stream logs from the running container
15 kubectl logs -f deployment/myapi
16
17 # Inspect a pod in detail to diagnose errors
18 kubectl describe pod <POD_NAME >
19
20 # Expose the service locally and get its access URL
21 minikube service myapi-svc --url
Listing 7.2. Main commands used for local Kubernetes testing with Minikube.
Using Minikube, it was possible to test the deployment logic in a controlled
environment and to validate image configuration. It was tested just on the
backend container because it would follow the same local configuration for
the frontend. This process also made it easier to debug YAML syntax, port
exposure, and container startup issues before transitioning to a remote cluster.
Although Minikube replicates the same Kubernetes API and behavior as the
EDITO cloud environment, it operates on a single-node setup using the local
Docker runtime. In contrast, EDITO runs a multi-node elastic cluster man-
aged through Helm and Onyxia, with resource allocation dynamically scaled
across nodes. While Minikube was suﬀicient for functional testing and early de-
bugging, final validation on EDITO was essential to confirm scaling behavior,
inter-pod communication, and resource limits under realistic cloud conditions.
==PAGE:61==
7.4 EDITO Elastic Cluster and Resource Management
51
7.4
EDITO Elastic Cluster and Resource
Management
The EDITO platform is built on a Kubernetes-based elastic cluster that provi-
sions computing nodes on demand. When a user starts a service, the scheduler
automatically selects a node with suﬀicient free resources (CPU, RAM, disk).
The cluster is configured in a way to optimized computational resource usage
at any time, by automatically scaling up and down computation nodes.
Resource allocation is specified through requests and limits.
Requests are
the minimum guaranteed resources reserved for a service, while limits repre-
sent the maximum usage. For CPU, exceeding the limit results in throttling;
reduction of clock speed and performance to conserve power.
Instead, for
memory, exceeding the limit results in an out-of-memory (OOM) termination.
CPU usage is expressed in millicores (mCPU), where 1000 mCPU correspond
to one CPU core. For instance, a service with a request of 500 mCPU is enti-
tled to 50% of one vCPU, although multi-threaded execution remains possible.
EDITO provides two types of nodes: CPU nodes (8 vCores, 32 GB RAM,
128 GB SSD) and GPU nodes (16 vCores, 112 GB RAM, 320 GB SSD, 48 GB
VideoRAM). The cluster scales between one and thirty CPU nodes, and be-
tween one and four GPU nodes. User projects are also subject to quotas to
ensure fair resource distribution. Personal projects are limited to 8 vCores,
32 GB RAM, 50 GB SSD, one GPU, and ten pods, whereas group projects can
access up to 16 vCores, 64 GB RAM, 100 GB SSD, one GPU, and one hundred
pods.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation and
Discussion
This chapter evaluates the anomaly detection prototype in terms of algorith-
mic performance, scalability, usability and limitations. Furthermore, it vali-
dates the EDITO service against known real-world events (e.g. marine heat-
waves) to demonstrate their scientific relevance.
8.1
Performance Assessment
The two implemented anomaly detection methods: the classical climatological
percentile method and the Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) approach from Ex-
treme Value Theory, were compared in terms of runtime eﬀiciency, scalability,
and robustness.
Runtime was measured by timing the execution of both algorithms over
identical datasets. A middleware was added to the FastAPI service, which
appended the backend process time as a custom response header, figure 8.1.
Therefore, the execution time of each request could be inspected directly in the
browsers’s developer console (e.g. Firefox Web Developer’s tab), in addition
to the total end-to-end latency.
==PAGE:63==
8.1 Performance Assessment
53
Figure 8.1.
Developer console in Firefox showing the response time of the
POST API request ".../run_pipeline_anomalies/classic" with the custom
x-process-time header.
During the runtime measurement tests, the data downloading time is the
same because both algorithms rely on the same Copernicus Marine dataset
(cmems_mod_glo_phy-thetao_anfc_0.083deg_P1D-m). Each method requires
access to the full daily time series of the target year, as well as at least 10
years of historical monthly data for the climatology construction. Therefore,
the download time is comparable across methods.
Theoretically, the classical method only requires summary statistics (monthly
climatology and empirical percentiles), so it should lead to runtimes on the
order of milliseconds to seconds. However, in practice the implementation can
be slower because it uses large xarray objects performing monthly grouping,
a difference for the deviation’s calculation and a global percentile over the
full spatio-temporal field. This forces materialization of the entire array in
memory and increases runtime significantly. By contrast, the POT method
operates on a one-dimensional regional mean time series and fits the Gener-
alized Pareto Distribution (GPD) only to the threshold exceedances, a much
smaller subset of the data. The GPD fit is performed using the optimized
scipy.stats library, which is computationally eﬀicient.
As a result, average tests showed that POT was often faster than the classical
method, sometime by an order of magnitude. Nevertheless, both algorithms
remained practical for regional analyses within EDITO.
Scalability was tested by varying both temporal and spatial input size. When
the number of time steps was increased (from one year to a decade of monthly
data), both methods scaled nearly linearly, but POT exhibited higher vari-
==PAGE:64==
54
8 Evaluation and Discussion
ance in runtime due to instability in GPD fitting become unstable. Similarly,
enlarging the spatial location box by changing the resolution (from a regional
domain to a large scale) increased memory usage. In this case, the classical
method remained lightweight, once the climatology over all the monthly years
was performed the time to calculate the threshold is always the same. In-
deed, the complexity of the classic approach is dominated by the percentile
operation. Monthly grouping and mean calculation scale linearly, O(n), as
does the subtraction for the deviations. However, the percentile is typically
implemented using a sorting method, with complexity O(n log n). This step
dominates the runtime, giving the classical method an overall complexity of
O(n log n).
The POT method instead required more careful resource allocation in Ku-
bernetes to avoid memory limits. It also requires an initial threshold, often
selected as the 95th percentile, which has the same O(n log n) cost. Once the
threshold is chosen, exceedances are extracted in O(n), and the Generalized
Pareto Distribution is fitted by maximum likelihood estimation. The MLE,
is an iterative optimization process and it makes the runtime of POT less
predictable. Especially, when dealing wiht a large chunk of data, different
regimes are mixed making the optmizer work harder.
Robustness was assessed by comparing anomalies flagged by the two meth-
ods. The classical method produced more detections, some of which reflected
strong but non-extreme seasonal variability, as its threshold closely follows
the daily climatological curve, figure 8.2(a)
==PAGE:65==
8.2 Limitations
55
((a)) Classical percentile method
((b)) POT method
Figure 8.2. Comparison of anomaly detection robustness based on the same db and
coordinates. (a) The classical climatological percentile method flags more anomalies,
including some reflecting strong seasonal variability. (b) The POT method identifies
fewer but more statistically rigorous anomalies linked to a predefined false-alarm
probability (q = 0.01).
On the other hand, POT flagged fewer but more statistically rigorous
events (figure 8.2(b)), explicitly tied to a chosen false-alarm rate q (0.01 in my
case). This trade-off illustrates the complementary roles of the two methods:
the classical detection provides a broad anomaly screening tool, while POT is
more focused to detect more rare extreme events.
8.2
Limitations
In this thesis, two main anomaly detection algorithms were implemented: the
classical statistical method based on climatological deviations, and the Peaks-
Over-Threshold (POT) method from Extreme Value Theory. Both approaches
were adapted from an internal DTU Aqua departmental code base and re-
structured to run as part of an API service. This adaptation required careful
refactoring to ensure compatibility with streaming input and user-defined pa-
rameters.
The classical method is computationally inexpensive and easily interpretable,
making it well suited as a baseline detector. However, its reliance on a fixed
percentile threshold (the 95th percentile of deviations from monthly climatol-
ogy) imposes limitations. In particular, it does not account for distributional
==PAGE:66==
56
8 Evaluation and Discussion
tail behavior, and therefore may under or over estimate the risk of rare ex-
tremes. This is a significant challenge in climate analysis, where anomalies
are by definition events that occur in the tails of the distribution.
While climate variables such as temperature and salinity are often approx-
imately Gaussian when aggregated over time or space, their extremes may
deviate significantly from Gaussianity.
This represents a limitation of the
classical statistical method since it is not tailored to capture the tail behavior
of the distribution. This is a crucial challenge when studying climate extremes,
where anomalies are by definition rare and lie in the distributional tails. To ad-
dress this challenge, more specialized statistical approaches based on Extreme
Value Theory (EVT), such as the Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) method, have
been employed.
The POT method, in contrast, provides a mathematically consistent frame-
work for modeling extremes beyond a threshold. By fitting the Generalized
Pareto Distribution (GPD) to exceedances, it directly links the false-positive
probability q to a quantifiable threshold zq. This enables a risk-based interpre-
tation of anomalies, which is particularly valuable when studying rare climate
extremes. The main challenge with POT lies in the careful selection of thresh-
olds: if the threshold is set too low, the GPD approximation may be invalid; if
too high, there are too few exceedances for stable estimation. In the codebase
the initial threshold t is selected in order to be the 95th percentile of the initial
distribution (climatology).
Another limitation is that POT assumes stationarity of the distribution. This
assumption is often violated in climate applications due to to seasonal cycles,
long-term trends, or regime shifts. So, in case of time dependency of the dis-
tribution, the algorithm can be adapted to drifting cases with the DSPOT.
The DSPOT (Drift-SPOT) algorithm was also tested. DSPOT extends POT
to streaming, non-stationary settings by recalibrating thresholds in the pres-
ence of drift. However, in the context of this work DSPOT was not fully op-
timized: although implemented, it introduced computational overheads and
required longer calibration phases and computation time.
For this reason,
it was not integrated as a primary detection tool. Nevertheless, DSPOT re-
mains a promising choice for future developments, in particular for real-time
monitoring of non-stationary climate data.
==PAGE:67==
8.3 Validation
57
8.3
Validation
In addition to algorithmic benchmarks, the prototype was also validated to see
whether it can detect historically documented extreme events. Particularly
relevant events are marine heatwaves (MHWs).
They have a huge impact
on marine biodiversity as they represent prolonged periods of anomalously
high sea surface temperature resulting in direct effects on marine organisms.
Several case studies are used as benchmarks, drawing from the global synthesis
of Holbrook et al. (2019) [16] and the ecological impact study of Chauhan et
al. (2023) [17].
Table 8.1. Representative marine heatwave (MHW) case studies used for validation.
Coordinates approximate the regions defined in Holbrook et al. (2019) [16]. All events
were measured at the sea surface (SST anomalies).
Region
Year(s)
Approx. Coordinates
Mediterranean Sea
2003
35–45◦N, 0–20◦E
Northwest Atlantic
2012
35–45◦N, 60–70◦W
Tasman Sea (EAC Extension)
2015/16
40–45◦S, 145–165◦E
Northeast Pacific “Blob”
2013–2016
30–50◦N, 130–150◦W
Bay of Bengal
2010
10–20◦N, 85–95◦E
One anomaly, the Northeast Pacific “Blob” (2015), was selected from table
8.1 as representative of extreme and well-documented warm anomalies that
strongly affected the upper-ocean temperature field and ecosystem response.
The validation was performed using the Copernicus Marine “Global Ocean
Physics Reanalysis” dataset (cmems_mod_glo_phy_my_0.083deg_P1D-m), which
provides daily sea water potential temperature (thetao) at a horizontal reso-
lution of 1/12◦(approximately 9 km). The baseline climatology was computed
from the same database using the monthly reanalysis dataset, averaging ten
years of available historical data (2010–2021) to obtain the 12-month clima-
tology for each grid point.
The spatial domain for each test was chosen following the approximate
coordinates summarized in table 8.1. For the Pacific case, the selected area
(30–50° N, 130–150° W) covers the region most affected by the 2013–2016
MHW known as “the Blob.”
==PAGE:68==
58
8 Evaluation and Discussion
8.3.1
Northeast Pacific “Blob” Event (2015)
The chosen validation case corresponds to the marine heatwave known as the
“Blob,” which occurred in the Northeast Pacific between 2013 and 2016 and
peaked in 2015. This event represents one of the most intense and persistent
warm anomalies ever recorded in the North Pacific, with surface temperature
anomalies exceeding +2–3 ◦C over large areas of the ocean [16].
The phe-
nomenon originated from a period of weak atmospheric cooling and anoma-
lously high sea level pressure, leading to suppressed vertical mixing and sus-
tained ocean surface warming. Its biological impacts were severe: reductions
in phytoplankton biomass, mass mortalities in marine species, and large-scale
displacements of pelagic ecosystems are reported [17].
In this work, the event was analyzed using the Copernicus Marine Global
Ocean Physics Reanalysis dataset at the surface layer (depth ≈0.5 m), for
the year 2015. The selected domain (30° N, 130 W selected with a 5 degrees res-
olution) encompasses the central region affected by the heatwave. The baseline
climatology was computed once over the historical period (2010–2021). This
fixed climatology-baseline approach ensures that anomalies are evaluated rela-
tive to a long-term reference mean, consistent with the methodology adopted
in Holbrook et al. (2019), where the baseline remains constant across years to
allow interannual comparisons of event intensity.
Figures 8.3 and 8.4 illustrate the temperature anomaly detections for 2015
using the two methods. Both analyses were based on daily thetao (sea water
potential temperature) values extracted from the same spatial domain.
==PAGE:69==
8.3 Validation
59
Figure 8.3. Northeast Pacific “Blob” anomaly detection for 2015 using the classical
climatological percentile method. The 95th-percentile threshold follows the seasonal
cycle, highlighting persistent warm conditions during summer and early autumn.
Figure 8.4. Northeast Pacific “Blob” anomaly detection for 2015 using the POT
method. The fixed Pareto threshold isolates fewer but more extreme exceedances
corresponding to the core of the 2015 heatwave.
The classical method (Figure 8.3) uses a percentile-based climatology that
varies smoothly throughout the seasonal cycle.
This makes it particularly
sensitive to sustained positive deviations, capturing the long duration of the
2015 anomaly, which extended from approximately day 160 to day 300. Such
==PAGE:70==
60
8 Evaluation and Discussion
persistence matches the multi-month development of the “Blob” described in
observational studies. The method therefore partially managed to model the
anomaly even if the deviations captured were not strictly extreme in a statis-
tical sense.
The POT method (Figure 8.4) applies a single, high static threshold deter-
mined from the tail of the historical distribution. In this configuration, the
threshold corresponds to a false-alarm probability of q = 0.05, which yields a
fixed extreme quantile independent of the seasonal cycle. Consequently, the
POT method identifies fewer events, focusing on the extreme, high-intensity
phases around the annual maximum. This behavior aligns with the definition
of marine heatwaves in extreme-value theory, where events are required to
exceed a fixed climatological threshold for a minimum duration.
From a physical point of view, both methods reproduce the warming pat-
tern associated with the 2015 Northeast Pacific anomaly, with temperature
peaks around +2.5 °C above the fixed baseline. However, their interpretations
differ. The classical approach captures the entire seasonal anomaly, whereas
the POT method isolates the core phase of the heatwave. Hence, this make
the POT more relevant for risk assessment and impact modeling.
8.4
Use of AI
Artificial Intelligence tools, in particular GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT were
extremely usefull during the thesis work. Copilot, an AI-powered extension
integrated into GitHub and used within the VSCode editor, was especially
valuable for correcting small bugs and accelerating the code refactoring pro-
cess. However, its reliability was limited in the more complex parts of the
pipeline, probably because it lacked access to the most recent documentation
of the EDITO ecosystem and its data models. In those cases, the traditional
approach of consulting the oﬀicial documentation and performing repeated
manual testing remained essential.
On the other hand, ChatGPT was essential in connecting conceptual and tech-
nical elements across the project. It helped in the early stages to give me ideas
to build a coherent architecture for the codebase and to design the interaction
between backend, frontend, and deployment components. Beyond technical
aspects, it was also used for grammar checks and sentence restructuring, fol-
==PAGE:71==
8.4 Use of AI
61
lowing specific prompts such as: “You are a software engineer reviewing your
friend’s master’s thesis. Act as a grammar and structure checker, pointing out
unclear content and suggesting improvements.” After providing the different
text or PDF, I was able to create a custom-GPT that was able to match and
understand the whole thesis big picture. Overall, ChatGPT served both as
an ideation partner and a technical writing assistant, supporting the develop-
ment of a production oriented system architecture which follows modern real
world deployment practices.
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The final chapter of this research provides a comprehensive summary of the
work accomplished and reflects on the obtained results.
Furthermore, it
presents proposals for future research and development of anomalies detec-
tion services within the EDITO framework.
9.1
Summary
Over the course of five months, the project achieved the complete restructur-
ing of the anomaly detection codebase and adaptation to deploy it as a service
on EDITO. The system was rebuilt with an object-oriented design, resulting
in modular classes that are reusable and extensible. This thesis developed
a first functional prototype of an anomaly detection service, with emphasis
placed on creating a robust and reproducible deployment pipeline suitable for
future extensions.
The algorithms for anomalies detections were partially provided by the DTU
Aqua department and were re-adapted to operate within a full-stack deploy-
ment context using technologies such as FastAPI, Docker, Kubernetes, Helm.
Two deployment pipelines were established: one for publishing backend and
frontend images on GHCR, and one for creating and managing the service
on EDITO. On EDITO, the service was designed to run across two pods
(backend and frontend) which communicate seamlessly. This demonstrates
the feasibility of integrating ocean data anomaly detection into the EDITO
Digital Twin Ocean infrastructure. It also shows the power of the platform in
performing statistical ocean analysis, while providing a foundation guidance
for deploying future marine full-stack services. The prototype, while limited in
scope, highlights the potential for scalable anomaly detection within EDITO
and illustrates how digital twin infrastructures can serve as practical tools for
climate and ocean monitoring. Furthermore, EDITO represents a significant
==PAGE:73==
9.2 Future Work
63
step forward in the way ocean data can be accessed and can serve to differ-
ent stakeholders for making impactful climate-based decisions. It has already
proved positive results in on demand coastal modeling, being useful to differ-
ent marine experts in preventing catastrophic events.
In conclusion, anomaly detection services such as the one developed in this
thesis can contribute directly to climate adaptation strategies, marine resource
management, and early-warning systems. The combination of robust statisti-
cal methods with a cloud-native digital twin environment has the potential to
transform how decisions are made in response to extreme events in the marine
domain.
9.2
Future Work
The codebase of the thesis is very modular, ensuring that the future devel-
oper could easily extend its functionalities. The next steps illustrate a natural
roadmap that mirrors the modular design of the current prototype and can be
a guide for future development. The first focus should be on strengthening the
algorithms by extending beyond the classical percentile and POT approaches
to more advanced statistical or machine learning techniques, and by investigat-
ing HPC solutions for large-scale or global analyses. In this case, it might be
necessary to extend EDITO service’s resources for memory and CPU. At the
moment, it is possible to set a max of four gigabyte of memory and one vCPU.
Therefore, for large mathematical model, it is a requirement to uncomment
the resource section in chart.yaml file in order to set the needed resources.
In parallel, the frontend can be improved to provide a richer user experience,
with more flexible map layouts, dynamic plotting options, and interactive
“what-if” scenarios, potentially moving some visualization logic directly to
the client side to improve responsiveness. A key strategy would be to apply a
clearer separation of concerns in the business logic by introducing more spe-
cialized backend endpoints. At present, the main anomaly detection process
is handled through a single POST endpoint, which computes the climatology,
applies the detection algorithm, and generates all output files and images in
the container before exposing them to the frontend. In a refactored archi-
tecture, these tasks could be decomposed. For example, when a user selects
a different database, the frontend would call an endpoint to delete the old
climatology baseline (freeing memory) and request a new climatology. This
==PAGE:74==
64
9 Conclusion
new climatology would then be passed to a dedicated GET endpoint, which re-
turns only the threshold value according to the selected algorithm. A separate
GET endpoint could retrieve daily data in the form of (x, y) series, leaving
the actual plotting to the frontend. Such a design would simplify backend
responsibilities, reduce memory overhead, and allow the frontend to support
more interactive and flexible visualization features.
Security, which was deliberately kept minimal during the prototype phase,
must become a priority in a production setting, requiring private containers
and authentication mechanisms to protect access. It is possible on EDITO to
pass SSH encrypted password in the service building phase. This would allow
only authorized users to access the containers.
Finally, the service should be expanded beyond the two hard-coded CMEMS
databases used in this thesis to connect with the full data lake of available
datasets, enabling anomaly detection across a wide range of physical and bio-
geochemical variables.
Following this roadmap, from algorithmic enhance-
ment, to improved user interaction, to security hardening, and finally to ex-
panded data access, would transform the present prototype into a fully op-
erational, scalable, and secure anomaly detection service within the EDITO
ecosystem.
==PAGE:75==
Appendices
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Docker Files
Recall that the application source code for both frontend and backend is avail-
able in a public repository at GitHub:
https://github.com/darioDTU/AnomaliesDetection
A.1
Frontend Docker
1
# 1. Use an official Node.js image as the build
environment
2 FROM node:20 AS build
3
4 # 2. Set working directory
5 WORKDIR /app
6
7 # 3. Copy package.json and package -lock.json (or yarn.lock)
8 COPY package*.json ./
9
10 # 4. Install dependencies
11 RUN npm install
12
13 # 5. Copy the rest of the app source code
14 COPY . .
15
16 # 6. Build the React app for production
17 RUN npm run build
18
19 # 7. Use a lightweight web server to serve the build (e.g.,
nginx)
20 FROM nginx:stable-alpine
21
22 # 8. Copy the build output to nginx's html directory
23 COPY --from=build /app/dist /usr/share/nginx/html
24
==PAGE:78==
68
A Docker Files
25 # Copy custom nginx.conf into container
26 # COPY nginx.conf /etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf
27
28 # 9. Expose port 80
29 EXPOSE 80
30
31 # 10. Start nginx
32 CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]
A.2
Backend Docker
1
FROM python:3.12.5-bullseye
2
3
WORKDIR /app
4
5
RUN pip install numpy==2.1.2
6
RUN pip install pandas==2.2.3
7
RUN pip install matplotlib==3.10.3
8
RUN pip install scipy==1.15.3
9
RUN pip install bokeh==3.7.3
10
RUN pip install argopy==1.2.0
11
RUN pip install uvicorn==0.34.3
12
RUN pip install fastapi==0.115.12
13
RUN pip install zarr==3.0.5
14
RUN pip install fsspec==2025.2.0
15
RUN pip install copernicusmarine==2.2.2
16
RUN pip install "xarray==2023.12.0" "zarr <3"
17
18
COPY . /app
19
20
COPY climatology.nc /app/
21
22
CMD ["uvicorn", "ada_api:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--
port", "80"]
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Agile Manifesto
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX C
Codebase
C.1
Backend
1 def fetch_temperature(self,
2
dataset_id : str,
3
starting_time : str,
4
ending_time : str,
5
variable : str,
6
minimum_longitude : float,
7
maximum_longitude : float,
8
minimum_latitude : float,
9
maximum_latitude : float,
10
climatology : bool = False) -> xr.
Dataset:
11
12
'''Fetch temperature data from Copernicus database.
'''
13
if climatology:
14
starting_time = "2010/01/01"
15
ending_time = datetime.now().strftime("%Y/%m/%d")
16
dataset_id = dataset_id.replace("D", "M")
17
18
ds = copernicusmarine.open_dataset(
19
dataset_id = dataset_id ,
20
variables = [variable],
21
username = "dcannistra",
22
password = ",b9UCHyV&xNzm;A",
23
minimum_longitude = minimum_longitude ,
24
maximum_longitude = maximum_longitude ,
25
minimum_latitude = minimum_latitude ,
26
maximum_latitude = maximum_latitude ,
27
start_datetime = starting_time ,
28
end_datetime = ending_time ,
29
minimum_depth = self.min_depth ,
==PAGE:81==
C.1 Backend
71
30
maximum_depth = self.max_depth
31
)
32
33
return ds
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX D
Deployment Pipelines
D.1
Deployment to GHCR
1
name: Docker Image CI for GHCR
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
branches:
6
- main
7
workflow_dispatch:
8
9
jobs:
10
push-store-image:
11
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
12
steps:
13
- uses: actions/checkout@v3
14
- name: Build and push backend image
15
run: |
16
docker login --username darioDTU --password ${{
secrets.GH_PAT}} ghcr.io
17
docker build -f backend/Dockerfile backend -t ghcr.
io/dariodtu/anomalies_detection_backend:1.0.0
18
docker push ghcr.io/dariodtu/
anomalies_detection_backend:1.0.0
19
20
- name: Build and push frontend image
21
run: |
22
docker build -f frontend/Dockerfile frontend -t
ghcr.io/dariodtu/anomalies_detection_frontend
:1.0.0
23
docker push ghcr.io/dariodtu/
anomalies_detection_frontend:1.0.0
==PAGE:83==
D.2 Service Deployment
73
D.2
Service Deployment
1
# Default values for jupyter.
2
3 global:
4
suspend: false
5
6 service:
7
image:
8
pullPolicy: Always
9
version: "ghcr.io/dariodtu/anomalies_detection_frontend
:1.0.0"
10
custom:
11
enabled: false
12
13 security:
14
allowlist:
15
enabled: false
16
17 environment:
18
user: onyxia
19
group: users
20
21 nameOverride: ""
22 fullnameOverride: ""
23
24 podSecurityContext:
25
fsGroup: 100
26
27 securityContext:
28
{}
29
# capabilities:
30
#
drop:
31
#
- ALL
32
# readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
33
# runAsNonRoot: true
34
# runAsUser: 1000
35
36 networking:
37
type: ClusterIP
38
clusterIP: None
39
service:
40
port: 80
==PAGE:84==
74
D Deployment Pipelines
41
user:
42
enabled: false
43
44 ingress:
45
enabled: true
46
tls: true
47
annotations:
48
[]
49
# kubernetes.io/tls-acme: "true"
50
#
- secretName: chart-example -tls
51
#
hosts:
52
#
- chart-example.local
53
54 resources:
55
{}
56
# We usually recommend not to specify default resources and
to leave this as a conscious
57
# choice for the user. This also increases chances charts
run on environments with little
58
# resources , such as Minikube. If you do want to specify
resources , uncomment the following
59
# lines, adjust them as necessary , and remove the curly
braces after 'resources:'.
60
# limits:
61
#
cpu: 100m
62
#
memory: 128Mi
63
# requests:
64
#
cpu: 100m
65
#
memory: 128Mi
66
67 startupProbe:
68
failureThreshold: 60
69
initialDelaySeconds: 5
70
periodSeconds: 5
71
successThreshold: 1
72
timeoutSeconds: 5
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
European digital twin ocean - powered by EDITO. [Online]. Available:
https://www.edito.eu/
[2]
European digital twin ocean - introducing EDITO-infra. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://edito-infra.eu/european-digital-twin-ocean-introducing-
edito-infra/
[3]
E. M. Lab. EDITO-model lab — european DIgital twin ocean. [Online].
Available: https://edito-modellab.eu/
[4]
K. G. Mehrotra, C. K. Mohan, and H. Huang, Anomaly Detection.
Springer International Publishing, pp. 21–32, series Title:
Terrorism,
Security, and Computation. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-3-319-67526-8_2
[5]
J.
J.
Cuadrado-Gallego
and
Y.
Demchenko,
Anomaly
Detection.
Springer International Publishing,
pp. 201–262. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-031-39129-3_4
[6]
A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly
detection in streams with extreme value theory,”
in Proceedings
of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, pp. 1067–1075. [Online]. Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3097983.3098144
[7]
What is an API (application programming interface)? | IBM. [Online].
Available: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/api
[8]
Agile manifesto for software development | agile alliance. [Online].
Available: https://agilealliance.org/agile101/the-agile-manifesto/
[9]
FastAPI. [Online]. Available: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[10] Welcome to pydantic - pydantic. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.
pydantic.dev/latest/
[11] Docker:
Accelerated
container
application
development.
[Online].
Available: https://www.docker.com/
[12] Production-grade container orchestration. [Online]. Available:
https:
//kubernetes.io/
[13] Onyxia datalab. [Online]. Available: https://www.onyxia.sh
[14] Global
ocean
physics
reanalysis.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/GLOBAL_
MULTIYEAR_PHY_001_030/description
[15] React. [Online]. Available: https://react.dev/
[16] N. J. Holbrook, H. A. Scannell, A. Sen Gupta, J. A. Benthuysen,
M. Feng, E. C. J. Oliver, L. V. Alexander, M. T. Burrows, M. G.
Donat, A. J. Hobday, P. J. Moore, S. E. Perkins-Kirkpatrick, D. A.
Smale, S. C. Straub, and T. Wernberg, “A global assessment of marine
heatwaves and their drivers,” vol. 10, no. 1, p. 2624. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-10206-z
[17] A. Chauhan, P. A. H. Smith, F. Rodrigues, A. Christensen, M. St. John,
and P. Mariani, “Distribution and impacts of long-lasting marine heat
waves on phytoplankton biomass,” vol. 10, p. 1177571. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2023.1177571/full
