==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
public.
==PAGE:3==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Abstract
As wind turbine rotors continue to increase in size to meet growing electricity demands, the
complexity of ensuring structurally sound and eﬀicient designs grows accordingly.
Modern
large-scale wind turbines, with rotor diameters approaching 300 m, will be exposed to signif-
icant vertical variations in wind direction and speed—veer and shear—to an extent not expe-
rienced by previous generations. These variations are expected to substantially influence the
aerodynamic loading on wind turbines. Therefore, accurately representing the wind climate,
and in particular the vertical wind profiles, is increasingly important to ensure accurate load
estimations for large wind turbines.
This thesis simulated and analyzed the IEA 22 MW reference wind turbine in HAWC2,
applying wind climate data from the Østerild test center, to assess the impact of veer and shear
on fatigue loads. When estimating 10-minute damage equivalent loads, a strong correlation was
found between shear and several load channels. The most strongly affected load channel—the
flap-wise blade-root moment—decreased by 21% on average when shear was removed. Con-
versely, veer did not exhibit a similar influence, with none of the investigated load channels
showing notable discrepancies. However, since veer showed a strong inverse correlation with
turbulence intensity, conditions at the test site characterized by high veer are expected to result
in reduced fatigue loads due to a less turbulent wind climate.
Although the conclusions of this thesis are largely limited to the Østerild test center, the
results demonstrate the importance of accurately representing the wind climate in which large
wind turbines operate. Misrepresentations of the vertical wind profile can lead to significant
errors in fatigue load estimation. Underestimating these loads may result in inaccurate tur-
bine lifetime predictions, whereas overestimations could lead to overly conservative and less
competitive designs.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
i
==PAGE:4==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Acknowledgments
I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the following individuals and organizations for
their support throughout the preparation of this thesis. First and foremost, I would like to thank
my supervisors—Jenni Rinker, Michael Courtney, Søren Oemann Lind, and Jesper Grossmann
Hansen—for their continuous guidance and feedback along the way. I am also grateful to the
Technical University of Denmark for providing me with this opportunity. Finally, I would like
to thank all those who contributed to the project through discussions, questions, and meetings
along the way.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
ii
==PAGE:5==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Nomenclature
ABL
Atmospheric boundary layer
ASL
Atmospheric surface layer
BEM
Blade element momentum
DEL
Damage equivalent load
DLC
Design load case
IEA
International Energy Agency
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
LIDAR
Light detection and ranging
LLJ
Low-level jet
LMN
Light mast north
MOST
Monin-Obukhov similarity theory
NREL
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
O&M
Operation and management
REWS
Rotor equivalent wind speed
RQ
Research question
RWT
Reference wind turbine
a
Induction factor
[-]
a′
Axial induction factor
[-]
Cl
Lift coeﬀicient
[-]
L
Obukhov length
[1/m]
m
Wóhler exponent
[-]
r
Radius
[m]
TI
Turbulence intensity
[-]
u
Inflow wind speed component
[m/s]
u∗
Friction velocity
[m/s]
U
Wind speed
[m/s]
v
Cross-flow wind speed component
[m/s]
WD
Wind direction
[°]
z
Height
[m]
z0
Surface roughness
[m]
α
Angle of attack
[°]
α
Shear exponent
[-]
αε
HAWC2 Mann turbulence box parameter
[-]
∆U
Shear
[m/s]
∆WD
Veer
[°]
θ
Potential temperature
[K]
κ
von Kármán constant
[-]
ϕ
Inflow angle
[°]
ω
Rotor speed
[RPM]
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
iii
==PAGE:6==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
Wind data measurement and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Vertical wind profile characteristics and influencing factors
. . . . . . . .
3
1.2.3
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.4
Identification of gaps in the literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Exploring wind metrics using lidar measurements
10
2.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
About the dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Quantifying veer and shear
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Wind metric correlations at the test site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Wind metric distributions for different sized wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
An average wind profile
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Using lidar-based wind profiles for load assessment on wind turbines
23
3.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Torque 2026 draft paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.2
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Assessing the impact of veer and shear on fatigue loads
34
4.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Simulation set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Visualizing and quantifying the impact of veer and shear
. . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Isolating the effect of veer and shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.3
Consequence of disregarding veer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
On the continuous growth of wind turbines and the impact thereof . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusion
51
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process 54
References
54
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
iv
==PAGE:7==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Appendices
58
A
Invalid lidar measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
B
Turbulence impact quantified . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C
Additional results from Sample 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
D
Reference wind turbine rotor comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
E
Normalized average wind profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
v
==PAGE:8==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
It is widely recognized that to meet the goals set to prevent or slow down climate change,
the electricity sector is one of the most important. To accommodate emission limitations and
expected growth in the electricity sector, the growth of wind energy, along with other renewable
electricity sources, is vital. Wind energy is already well established as one of the most important
sources within the renewable energy sector and is also one of the fastest growing. Consequently,
an increased wind energy capacity will certainly be required in the future as the sector continues
to expand [1, 2].
The requirement for an overall increase in the wind energy sector also implies requirements
for the individual turbines, and so the nameplate capacity of wind turbines continues to in-
crease. Additionally, as more wind energy is moved offshore, the installation limitations are
reduced, which also allows for even larger turbines. In return, this requires taller towers, larger
nacelles, and longer blades, which all contribute to increasing the total tip height of the turbine
[1–4].
To accurately assess and predict the performance of wind turbines, it is necessary to fully
understand the wind climate in which the turbines are located. For previous generations of
wind turbines this could be handled using meteorological (met) masts. However, with the con-
tinuous increase in tip height, the physical limitations of towers become apparent. Due to costs
and structural challenges met masts are rarely built taller than around 200 m [4–8]. These
physical limitations can cause inaccuracies as wind turbines reach higher altitudes, as it might
be required to extrapolate and predict the data in the event that measurements no longer suﬀice.
Reaching higher altitudes presents challenges not only for met masts but also for wind tur-
bines. The literature generally agrees that one of the main implications of increasing turbine
size is uneven aerodynamic loading, caused by variations in wind speed and direction between
the lowest and highest points of the rotor—commonly referred to as shear and veer [1, 2, 9].
This uneven loading will increase the fatigue loads of the turbine and potentially decrease the
expected lifetime. However, to what extent for new large wind turbines with tip heights above
that of typical measurement heights is not yet fully clear.
Meteorological theory related to shear profile estimation is well established in the literature;
however, this is not the case for veer profiles [4]. Furthermore, the International Electrotechni-
cal Commission (IEC) 61400-12-1:2017 standard formally recognized lidar (light detection and
ranging) measurements, and this content has since been incorporated into the restructured IEC
61400-50-2:2022 standard [10]. Consequently, while measurements from met masts have been
adequate in the past, the use of lidar-based wind measurements for modern wind turbines is
gaining increased attention as a means of improving accuracy—particularly as both technologies
continue to advance physically and technologically.
1.2
State of the art
The aim of this literature survey is to evaluate the current state of research on the topics briefly
introduced in Section 1.1 and to identify where the state of the art falls short. Specifically, it
examines methods used to measure and quantify wind climates, with particular attention to
the possibilities available at the Østerild test center, from which the data used throughout this
thesis are obtained. It also reviews previous studies describing the micrometeorology relevant
to veer and shear profiles. Finally, it investigates the design load cases (DLCs) defined in the
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
1
==PAGE:9==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
IEC standards, discusses the relevance of fatigue loading in this context, and summarizes how
previous research has approached the simulation and assessment of such loads.
1.2.1
Wind data measurement and processing
In the wind energy sector, data acquisition has traditionally been conducted using met masts.
However, due to the physical limitations of these masts and the continuous increase in wind
turbine size [5], lidars are becoming an increasingly common instrument.
Data acquisition
In [7] the influence of atmospheric stability on wind turbine loads is inves-
tigated using data from four different sites, all provided using met masts ranging in heights from
30–116.5 m. Similarly [6] and [4] describe the usage of data from many different met masts,
this time ranging in heights between 40–200 m.
Alternatively, lidar data have been used in [11] and [12]. The first study uses lidar data
ranging from 40–2000 m to observe and simulate low-level jets (LLJs), whilst the second study
uses lidar measurements up to 180 m to characterize veer profiles. In [8], lidar measurements
up to an altitude of 1100 m were used to characterize various parameters of “mid-altitude
wind conditions”, including Weibull parameters, turbulence intensity, and veer. The authors
also highlight the over-reliance on approximations and reanalysis data above 200 m due to the
scarcity of direct measurements at such heights.
According to the IEC 61400-12-1:2022 standard on power performance, wind speed measure-
ments are by default taken at hub height. However, the standard also includes the following
recommendations—paraphrased from [13]:
• It is recommended to measure wind shear at sites where extreme atmospheric stability
conditions are expected to occur frequently.
• If veer and shear are not measured across the entire rotor, additional uncertainty shall be
applied to the equivalent wind speed.
• For small wind turbines, a single wind speed measurement at hub height is considered
suﬀicient, as veer and shear effects are assumed to be negligible.
Moreover, the standard specifies that when measuring shear, at least three wind speed measure-
ments are required. However, it is recommended to include additional measurements to reduce
uncertainty. These three required measurements include:
(i) One at hub height H ± 1.0%
(ii) One below hub height between H – R and H –

2
3R

, where R is the radius of the rotor
(iii) One above hub height between H +

2
3R

and H + R
The shear can then be used to estimate the rotor equivalent wind speed (REWS) as an alter-
native to relying solely on a single measurement at hub height. Alternatively, REWS can be
derived using a remote sensing device such as lidar to further reduce measurement uncertainty.
The IEC 61400-50-2:2022 standard (“Wind measurement - Application of ground-mounted re-
mote sensing technology”) provides detailed guidance on the use and processing of lidar data
to ensure compliance with best practices [10].
Effectively, this means that unless the REWS is calculated or recommendations to supple-
ment the hub height measurement with veer and shear are followed, veer and shear will be
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
2
==PAGE:10==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
replaced by some uncertainty. This observation aligns with the statement made in [8] regarding
the continued over-reliance on approximations, as the default approach still relies on a single
wind speed measurement at hub height.
Østerild test center site introduction
The Østerild National Test Center for Large Wind
Turbines—hereafter referred to as the Østerild test center for brevity—is at the forefront of
wind turbine testing. The test sites allow for testing of wind turbines with a total height of up
to 330 m and a rated capacity of up to 32 MW. This is far beyond the current industry standard
and will prove valuable as the industry advances. The site itself is located in the north-west of
Jylland, Denmark, just 4 km from the sea in the north and 20 km from the sea in the west.
It is located on a coastal plain and has only very few obstacles in its vicinity, all of which are
deemed insignificant to the wind flow at the test center [14, 15].
To facilitate wind measurements, two 250 m met masts—equipped with wind speed and
direction sensors up to a height of 244 m—are installed at the Østerild test center: one located
in the northern part of the site (LMN) and one in the southern part (LMS). In addition, the
test center has access to the ground-based lidar: Beam6X-325.
A schematic of the LMN met mast is shown in Figure 1, illustrating all installed instru-
ments, including ten cup anemometers, four wind vanes, five sonic anemometers, and several
additional sensors. This represents a relatively complex measurement setup compared to the
lidar, which integrates many of the same measurement capabilities into a single compact unit
occupying roughly one cubic meter of space. Furthermore, this particular lidar system enables
wind measurements up to altitudes of 1000 m [16, 17].
Although the met masts at Østerild are considerably taller than those typically reported
in the literature, their measurement range remains limited compared to that of lidars. This is
illustrated in Figure 2, which shows 10-minute averaged wind measurements from both the lidar
and the met mast for an arbitrary date and time. The figure clearly demonstrates the higher
vertical coverage of the lidar compared to the LMN met mast and simultaneously displays the
measurement precision of the lidar, with only slight inaccuracies in the wind direction, as well as
one of its limitations—its inability to measure below approximately 30 m with the configuration
used. However, the absence of low-altitude measurements is primarily an issue for smaller wind
turbines, for which lidar measurements are generally unnecessary.
1.2.2
Vertical wind profile characteristics and influencing factors
Veer and shear are prevalent topics of interest within micrometeorology; however, exact defini-
tions, effects on wind turbines, and causes of the observed profiles are still ongoing topics.
Shear profiles
Shear refers to the vertical variation in wind speed resulting from the balance
between mechanical and thermodynamic forces. The commonly observed decrease in wind speed
near the surface is primarily caused by frictional interactions with the ground [6].
Wind shear has been extensively studied in the literature for several decades, and the the-
oretical framework used for simulating and vertically extrapolating wind speed data in the
absence of direct measurements is well established [4]. Under neutral atmospheric stability,
several models have been proposed, most commonly the log-law or the power-law [19]. The
power-law, which employs an empirical formulation, is also adopted in the IEC 61400-50-1:2022
standard [20]. It estimates the shear exponent (α) from multiple wind speed measurements and
is generally expressed as:
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
3
==PAGE:11==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
120cm
Dau
Mox
Pow
Dau
Mox
Pow
Dau
Mox
Pow
rs485
rs485
Figure 1: Schematic of the instrumentation of the light mast north (LMN) at the Østerild test
center. Source: [18].
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
4
==PAGE:12==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 2: Veer and shear profiles using the 10-minute averaged measurements from light mast
north (LMN) and the Beam6X-325 lidar.
uzi = uhub
 zi
zhub
α
(1)
Where uzi is the horizontal wind speed component at a given height zi. uhub is the horizontal
wind speed component at hub height (or another reference), and correspondingly zhub is the
hub height, as specified in [20].
Alternatively, the log-law can be derived from Monin-Obukhov similarity theory (MOST),
and is described using the formula [19]:
uzi = u∗
κ

ln
 zi
z0

– Ψm(ζ)

,
for zi ≫z0
(2)
Where u∗is the friction velocity, κ is the von Kármán constant (often approximated as
κ ≈0.4), z0 is the surface roughness, and Ψm(ζ) is the stability function used to handle non-
neutral stability [19].
This means that for neutral stability, a simplified version can be considered alternatively:
uzi = u∗
κ

ln
 zi
z0

,
for zi ≫z0
(3)
However, like all theoretical models, it includes assumptions, which consequently causes
limitations. The log-law is generally considered most applicable below approximately 200 m
altitude—within the atmospheric surface layer (ASL) [4, 21, 22]. Moreover, the height of the
ASL is inversely related to atmospheric stability; under more stable conditions, the ASL be-
comes shallower, further restricting the validity of such formulations [6, 21].
Consequently,
the empirical power-law is sometimes preferred for such conditions [4], aligning with previous
observations regarding the reliance on extrapolated estimates above 200 m [8].
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
5
==PAGE:13==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer profiles
Veer—also referred to as directional shear or turning—is how the inflow angle of
wind changes with altitude. Changes in veer, much like shear, are driven by the balance of forces
within the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). At higher altitudes, in the free troposphere,
wind flow tends to follow the isobars due to the balance between the pressure gradients and the
Coriolis force. Closer to the surface, however, frictional forces once again become significant,
inducing veer [6].
Veer is additionally stated to be affected by several other factors such as terrain, wind speed,
seasonal changes, and atmospheric stability. In general, more veer is observed in hillier terrain,
and stronger veer is observed at lower wind speeds [12]. The affect of atmospheric stability on
both veer and shear is discussed later in this section.
Compared to shear, the theoretical basis of veer remains limited. While recent work has
made some progress, largely motivated by the increasing size of modern turbines, existing models
are still applicable primarily in idealized cases [4].
Low-level jets and negative shear
When considering veer and sheer it is important to
note specific phenomena which might also affect the profiles other than general effects. One of
such phenomena is LLJs, which are identified by a strong local maxima in wind speed within
the lower part of the ABL. Typically, the core of the LLJ falls within the first 500 m above the
surface layer [11].
Above the core of the LLJ, distinct regions of negative shear are observed, which have been
reported in the literature to reduce nacelle and tower motions when positioned favorably relative
to the rotor [23]. Conversely, if the LLJ is not optimally located relative to the rotor, stronger
structural excitations may occur, potentially increasing fatigue loads. Veer is also influenced by
the presence of LLJs, with observed behavior varying depending on whether measurements are
taken above or below the LLJ core, and further influenced by the season during which the LLJ
occurs [24].
LLJs are generally understood to form under four primary conditions. Two of these in-
volve frictional decoupling during surface cooling and the presence of horizontal temperature
gradients—both of which are particularly relevant in coastal regions. Orography can also influ-
ence LLJ formation; however, this effect is less pronounced at the Østerild site, as Denmark is
generally characterized by flat terrain [24].
Atmospheric stability
Stability is the term used to describe the effect of potential tem-
perature (θ) where neutral stability—or neutral stratification—is the case where dθ
dz = 0. In
a neutrally stabilized atmosphere, the change in potential temperature with altitude will not
affect air rising or sinking.
Alternatively, in stable dθ
dz > 0 or unstable dθ
dz < 0 conditions, the change in potential tem-
perature with increasing altitude will cause air rising to correspondingly either be pushed back
down in stable conditions or pushed further aloft in unstable conditions [19].
Stability is typically also described using the Obukhov length (L) or alternatively the non-
dimensionalized stability parameter ζ = z/L for ease of application. Based on the stability
parameter stability can be defined as:
• z/L > 0 for stable conditions.
• z/L ≈0 for neutral conditions.
• z/L < 0 for unstable conditions.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
6
==PAGE:14==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
This can also be expanded to include very stable or very unstable conditions when |z/L| is
greater. However, specific definitions other than stable and unstable conditions in general differ
from one study to another [24, 25].
The influence of atmospheric stability on veer and shear has been widely discussed in the
literature, yet no clear consensus has been reached. [6] report that veer tends to be strongest
under stable conditions. Likewise [4] state that veer and shear are affected by stability and
specifically that stable conditions are expected to increase both. In contrast, [12] proposes that
larger veer can be found during neutral stability.
Although the precise influence of stability on veer and shear remains uncertain, it is evident
that atmospheric stability affects wind profiles, and consequently, the loads acting on wind
turbines.
In [24] which investigated LLJs at Østerild and four other sites, the impact of atmospheric
stability was also included, showing how more LLJs were typically present under stable condi-
tions.
1.2.3
Loads
Loads are a fundamental consideration when assessing the performance and lifetime of a wind
turbine. The primary loads acting on a turbine arise from aerodynamic forces (lift and drag),
gravitational forces, and centrifugal forces generated by rotor rotation.
Design load cases
To ensure the structural safety of wind turbines, the IEC 61400-1:2019
standard [26] defines a set of DLCs—with additional specifications for offshore turbines pro-
vided in IEC 61400-3:2019—that each turbine must satisfy as a minimum requirement. The
DLCs encompass both ultimate and fatigue load assessments across a wide range of operating
conditions, including normal power production, start-up and shutdown sequences, emergency
stops, and more.
For ultimate loads depending on the expected occurrence of the situation investigated, dif-
ferent safety factors must be included when estimating the loads. For fatigue loads, which is the
focus of this thesis, the partial safety factors instead depend on the type of load, the material,
and the consequences in the event of failure [26].
Veer and shear impact on fatigue loads
Correctly assessing the loads acting on a wind
turbine is important not only in terms of safety, but also when considering the operation and
management (O&M) costs. Turbulence is well known to be one of the main drivers of fatigue
loads; however, research suggests that veer and shear are becoming more important as turbine
blades continue to increase in length [6, 27].
[28] identify turbulence and shear as the most sensitive parameters influencing turbine loads,
with veer considered a secondary factor. This aligns with the findings of [29], who reported that
shear has “an appreciable influence”, while veer exerts only a small or negligible effect on loads.
More recently, [27] demonstrated that veer can, however, be significant for certain load channels.
It is important to note that for the studies mentioned throughout this section, the scope
typically still falls within what is possible to investigate using met mast measurements. [28]
and [7] both examine the NREL 5 MW reference wind turbine (RWT), which has a total height
of approximately 153 m. Similarly, [29] analyze loads on the DTU 10 MW RWT, with a total
height just below 200 m, while [24] investigate the IEA 15 MW turbine, although without
performing load analyses specifically.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
7
==PAGE:15==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
The interest for new large wind turbine rotors is however significant, and studies have begun
being done. [30] looks at the recently published IEA 22 MW RWT and explores the turbine
in different atmospheric stability scenarios, but also strongly advises that more load cases are
analyzed potentially using higher fidelity models compared to typical blade element momentum
(BEM) models. Likewise [27] also investigate the IEA 22 MW RWT but similarly suggest for
future work regarding different wind climates and how they might affect the loads on such large
wind turbines.
Modeling of turbines and wind climates and simulation of loads
In the literature, it
is evident that most investigated turbines are those for which publicly available models exist,
such as the NREL 5 MW, DTU 10 MW, and IEA 15 or 22 MW turbines [7, 24, 27–30].
Appendix D provides a figure comparing the sizes of the four RWT rotors along with the
maximum measurement height of the data sources used throughout the thesis.
The simulation of wind turbines requires either measurements from a real wind climate or
a generated wind climate. In [28] the wind conditions were generated using TurbSim, which
employs an IEC Kaimal turbulence spectrum. [7] makes use of both turbulence and mean wind
speed measurements from met masts at four different sites. [29] sets up a turbulent wind field
that is statistically characterized by the variables they intend to observe and analyze.
[24]
uses lidar data from five different locations, but it is worth mentioning again that they did
not include load calculations. Finally, [30] includes both a lower fidelity method, which—like
[28]—made use of TurbSim for the generation of the inflow conditions. They also included a
higher fidelity method that utilized NREL SOWFA for simulation purposes. Based on this,
there does not seem to be a preference in the literature studied whether to use generated or real
data.
In terms of simulation and load analysis, the studies reviewed consistently rely on OpenFAST
(developed by NREL) or HAWC2 (developed by DTU Wind Energy) [7, 27–30].
1.2.4
Identification of gaps in the literature
An evaluation of the current literature shows that research on the topics outlined in Section 1.1
is still ongoing, and several unresolved questions remain.
Firstly, the analysis of large wind turbines with nameplate capacities exceeding 20 MW
is relatively new in the literature, and the few studies addressing this specifically recommend
further load analyses [27, 30]. Moreover, the meteorological phenomena occurring at altitudes
beyond those typically measurable using met masts remain of particular interest, with [8] high-
lighting the over-reliance on approximations above 200 m. Finally, while comparisons between
different sources of fatigue loading have been carried out, these studies have so far focused only
on smaller wind turbines such as the NREL 5 MW and DTU 10 MW reference models.
1.3
Research questions
Based on the literature survey, five research questions (RQ) are defined.
RQ 1: How can the measurements from the Beam6X-325 lidar be used to classify
observations at the Østerild test center and how might these high-altitude lidar
measurements impact load simulations for the next generation of large wind tur-
bines?
The measurements from the Beam6X-325 lidar will be analyzed before the load analysis as
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
8
==PAGE:16==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
a means to identify trends and phenomena in the data which could be interesting to use dur-
ing load simulations. In addition, the impact of being limited to met mast measurements, as
opposed to lidar measurements, will also be investigated.
RQ 2: How can the measurements from the Beam6X-325 lidar be used for aeroe-
lastic simulations of the IEA 22 MW RWT using the HAWC2 code?
The lidar provides 10-minute averaged data as well as high-frequency data, which has to be
utilized for fatigue load analysis [17]. According to the IEC 61400 1:2019 standard at least
six 10-minute stochastic realizations of wind speeds are required [26]. This requirement will
therefore form the basis for how the lidar data are processed and applied in the subsequent
analysis.
RQ 3: How do veer and shear affect the fatigue loads of new large wind turbines,
specifically the IEA 22 MW RWT?
Using HAWC2 simulations, an analysis will provide insight into this topic. For this purpose,
a customized onshore version of the publicly available IEA 22 MW RWT—specifically the
monopile design—will be analyzed [31].
RQ 4: How does the effect of veer and shear compare with turbulence-driven fatigue
loads?
Expanding on the load analysis, a discussion of the effects of veer and shear will be included.
The purpose is to assess how the fatigue loads induced by veer and shear for new, large wind
turbines compare to those induced by turbulence.
RQ 5: Will the continuous growth in wind turbine rotor size cause problems when
considering veer and shear at higher altitudes?
The affect of veer and shear for future turbines will be qualitatively assessed along with a
prediction of how much of a risk it might pose, or in which scenarios it might become a risk. In
addition, based on the findings, ideas for potential further topics of interest to investigate will
be suggested.
1.4
Outline
The structure of the thesis follows the research questions:
(i) RQ 1 is addressed in two parts. The first part, which focuses on classifying the observations
at the Østerild test center, is covered in Section 2. The second part, which examines how
high-altitude lidar measurements influence load simulations for the next generation of large
wind turbines, is presented in Section 3. This section includes a draft paper prepared for
the Torque conference in 2026, in which a sample of HAWC2 simulations is analyzed
through a case study comparing lidar-based simulations with those based on met mast
measurements and extrapolations.
(ii) RQ 2 is first addressed in Section 3, where the application of lidar data for fatigue load
simulations is introduced. It is then further examined in Section 4, where a detailed load
analysis focused on the effects of veer and shear is conducted.
(iii) Finally, RQs 3, 4, and 5 are addressed in Section 4 through the analysis of two additional
samples of HAWC2 simulations. These simulations are examined in conjunction with an
outlook on future generations of wind turbines to provide a broader perspective on the
findings.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
9
==PAGE:17==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
2
Exploring wind metrics using lidar measurements
2.1
Objective
The purpose of this section is to provide an introduction to the dataset explored as part of
writing this thesis. This is intended to cover the first part of research question 1, which aims
to explore the lidar observations at the Østerild test center.
The test site itself was briefly explored in Section 1.2.1, and Section 2.2 aims to increase
the reader’s understanding of the data available from the Østerild test center and how it is
intended to be applied in this thesis. Section 2.3 is written as a means of exploring different
ways of quantifying veer and shear and to define the quantification method chosen for this
thesis. Section 2.4 applies the methods for quantifying veer and shear to explore correlations in
wind metrics, including veer, shear, and wind speed. And finally, wind metric distributions for
different sized wind turbine rotors are explored in Section 2.5.
2.2
About the dataset
The thesis uses data compiled at the Østerild test center from 5 months (May-October) back
in 2024. The two data sources—lidar and met mast—are both summarized in Table 1. In this
table, the altitude range in which they are able to measure is stated, as well as the number of
measurements within this altitude range.
Table 1: Comparison of the two measurement devices used to collect wind data at the Øster-
ild test center.
aThe lowest measurements are removed due to disturbances from trees and
shrubbery and are never used throughout the thesis. bDepends on the measurement equipment
utilized.
Beam6X-325 lidar
LMN met mast
Altitude range of wind speed measurements [m]
30-497
7-244a, b
N wind speed sensors [-]
181
≤10b
Altitude range of wind direction measurements [m]
30-497
7-244a, b
N wind direction sensors [-]
181
5
Other notable features
- Data filtering
- 1, 10, and 20 Hz measurementsb
- Meteorological sensors
Throughout this thesis, the lidar serves as the primary source of wind profile data, while
the LMN met mast is used for verification of wind speed and direction.
The met mast is
also employed for its high-frequency measurement capability and for its meteorological sensors,
which include temperature, relative humidity, rain, and pressure.
One small note regarding the lidar measurement range is that while it in this study is limited
to 497 m, it has the ability to measure all the way up to 1000 m.
The main data source from the lidar consist of 10-minute averaged wind profiles, including
both wind speed and direction. These profiles are provided with high precision, with measure-
ments taken approximately every 2.5 meters. An example lidar-based wind profile was shown
along with the corresponding met mast measurements in Figure 2.
Based on these definitions, it is important to define the wind speed and wind direction for
the latter parts of this thesis to avoid ambiguity. When mentioning wind speeds (U) it will be
the average wind speed based on the measurements within the altitude of the rotor span. As
an example, for the IEA 22 MW RWT rotor, which has a hub height of 170 m and rotor radius
of 284 m, the average wind speed is calculated as:
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
10
==PAGE:18==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
U =
R zN
z0 U(z) dz
zN – z0
,
z0 = 28 m, zN = 312 m
(4)
In practice, since the measurements are available at discrete heights, the integral is approx-
imated numerically using np.trapezoid.
For the wind direction (WD) an average is also applied. The averaging is performed on
the sine and cosine components of the wind direction measurements, followed by reconstruction
using np.arctan2 to avoid discontinuities around the 0◦/360◦boundary:
WD = arctan2
 R zN
z0 sin
 WD(z)

dz
zN – z0
,
R zN
z0 cos
 WD(z)

dz
zN – z0
!
,
z0 = 28 m, zN = 312 m. (5)
With the definitions of wind speed and direction made clear, the analysis of the data can
continue, and the first step is to filter the available data. The lidar provides a signal-to-noise
ratio that allows for the removal of a significant amount of invalid measurements. In addition
to noisy measurements, certain dates are also removed because of weather conditions or other
practical reasons.
Moreover, while the test site, in Section 1.2.1, was stated to have no significant obstacles
interfering with the measurements, this does not take into account the turbines that were being
tested at the time the measurements were performed.
In Figure 3 a sample of 10-minute averaged wind profiles from the lidar—shear profiles
specifically in this case—is shown. In the illustration, the average of the sampled profiles is
also shown, and from this a clear pattern is formed. The wind speed is significantly reduced
below 200 m due to wake effects from the turbines placed south/south-east of the measurement
equipment.
The IEC standard 61400-12-5:2022 has a specific procedure for handling sectors influenced
by turbine wakes, however, is not specified for lidars [32]. Therefore, because the main focus
is on lidar-based observations—which are obtained from the ground-based lidar, in an upside-
down cone shape with in outward angle of 30°—a safety precaution is taken to make sure that
wake-induced disturbances are avoided. Practically, this is done by only using measurements
obtained from the western sector, i.e., wind profiles with WD ∈[225°, 315°].
To initially visualize the dataset used and the observations removed through turbine wake
filtering, a wind rose is plotted in Figure 4. The wind rose is constructed using mean wind
speeds and directions observed for the IEA 22 MW RWT rotor as described in Equations (4)
and (5).
In the wind rose plot the western sector is highlighted, whilst the opacity of the remaining
sectors is decreased. This shows that keeping the western sector allows for keeping the main wind
direction observed at the Østerild test center. The removal of everything except the western
sector decreases the size of the dataset by a little more than 50%, with a stronger tendency to
remove wind profiles with lower average wind speeds.
This is to prove that the removal of wake-influenced sectors has not had detrimental effects
on the data availability, as the most interesting scenarios will most likely not be the ones
observed with low wind speeds or the ones outside the western sector.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
11
==PAGE:19==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 3: Sampled 10-minute averaged lidar-based shear profiles (gray) from the wind direction
sector affected by turbine wakes near the measurement equipment. The mean profile calculated
from the samples is shown in blue.
2.3
Quantifying veer and shear
Following the definitions of wind speed and direction and the discussion of the dataset and its
limitations, the next step is to quantify veer and shear.
The goal is to establish a quantitative measure that can be applied to both wind metrics,
while still providing an accurate representation of each wind metric separately. For shear, one
common approach is to use the shear exponent from the power-law (recall Equation (1)). How-
ever, since no direct equivalent exists for veer, an alternative metric is preferred, ideally one
that is also more tangible than the shear exponent.
The methods analyzed include the following:
• The maximum difference of the wind metric of interest within the span of the rotor
investigated:
∆U = max
 U(z)

– min
 U(z)

,
for z ∈[z0, zN]
(6)
Here, z0 and zN describe the altitude boundaries of the rotor of interest.
Normally,
circular wind directions require special handling near the 0◦/360◦boundary; however,
this is unnecessary here because the dataset is restricted to the western sector. Therefore,
U can be replaced by WD in Equation (6) to quantify veer instead of shear.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
12
==PAGE:20==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 4: Wind rose displaying the 10-minute averaged lidar measurements. The measurements
from the western sector (WD ∈[225°, 315°]) are highlighted.
• The standard deviation:
σ(U) =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=0
 U(zi) – U
2,
for z ∈[z0, zN]
(7)
Where U can once again simply be replaced by WD due to the filtering applied to the
dataset.
• And finally, to investigate shear as a baseline, the shear exponent based on the highest
and lowest—in terms of altitude—wind speed measurements within the rotor span:
α(U) =
ln
 Uz0
UzN

ln

z0
zN

(8)
A comparison between the three methods described in Equations (6)–(8) is provided in Fig-
ure 5, where they are all calculated and shown for 5 days of 10-minute averaged shear profiles.
As shown in Figure 5, the methods exhibit a very strong correlation, suggesting that any
of the three could be used. In specific cases, the shear exponent from the power-law may be
preferred, as it has the ability to identify negative shears through negative shear exponents.
However, for this thesis, the more tangible metrics, that are also capable of quantifying veer,
are favored.
Figure 6 shows the same samples analyzed in Figure 5, now with veer quantified using the
previously discussed methods. Again, a strong correlation between the two approaches is ob-
served, indicating that either method is suitable.
For clarity and consistency, the maximum difference method, described in Equation (6),
is therefore chosen to quantify veer and shear throughout the remainder of this thesis, as it
provides a comprehensible measure that effectively captures both wind metrics.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
13
==PAGE:21==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 5: The three different shear metrics, defined in Equations (6)–(8), calculated for 5 days
of 10-minute averaged shear profiles.
Figure 6: The two different veer metrics, following the approach from Equations (6) and (7),
calculated for 5 days of 10-minute averaged veer profiles.
2.4
Wind metric correlations at the test site
Using the definitions of veer (∆WD), shear (∆U), and wind speed (U) the correlations between
these three wind metrics are analyzed. The analysis involves examining the distributions of veer
and shear as functions of wind speed, as well as their relationship to each other. This approach
is intended to identify trends and typical behavior among the metrics, while also providing a
broader understanding of the wind climate and the dataset as a whole.
Practically, this is done by using the previous definitions from Equations (4), (5), and (6)
together with the rotor span of the IEA 22 MW RWT [31].
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
14
==PAGE:22==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 7: Wind speed versus shear, with the density of observations indicated by the color map.
Each data point is extracted from a single lidar-based 10-minute averaged wind profile.
Figure 7 is the first of three plots constructed to illustrate correlations between the wind
metrics of interest. In this figure, shear is plotted as a function of wind speed using a scatter-
plot, with a color bar indicating the density of observations.
In Figure 7 a strong correlation between wind speed and shear is made clear. As the average
wind speed increases, so does the typical shear measured across the wind turbine rotor.
Furthermore, a quantitative trend emerges: for a wind speed of U = x m/s, the most
commonly observed shear is approximately ∆U = x/2 m/s.
The observed behavior can be
partly attributed to how U is defined—specifically, as the average wind speed across the rotor
rather than i.e. the maximum wind speed. Had a different wind speed definition been used, the
exact relationship between wind speed and shear would likely have been slightly skewed.
Moreover, the variance of shear within a given wind speed bin appears to increase at higher
wind speeds. This is particularly noticeable when comparing the narrow shear range at lower
wind speeds around 5–6 m/s—where the color map indicates that observations are frequent—to
the broader range at higher wind speeds around 10–12 m/s. Despite fewer data points at higher
wind speeds, the greater variation remains evident, thus reinforcing the observation.
Other observations include outliers at low wind speeds where high shear is present. These
are mostly caused by errors in the lidar measurements combined with insuﬀicient filtering. As
described in Section 2.2, the built-in signal-to-noise ratio from the lidar was applied to remove
invalid measurements; however, despite effectively eliminating most errors, some invalid data
can still pass through the filter. A few examples are provided in Appendix A, showing either a
pronounced spike in wind speed around 40–50 m or cases where unstable measurements domi-
nate the wind profile.
One final note concerns the range of wind speeds observed and analyzed. In principle, a
higher number of strong-wind cases could be expected. However, two factors limit the occurrence
of such observations:
(i) Averaging wind speeds across the rotor, rather than obtaining them at a single height—
e.g., tip height—naturally lowers the overall value because the lower wind speeds at lower
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
15
==PAGE:23==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
altitudes are included.
(ii) The data were collected between May and October, introducing a seasonality bias. The
highest wind speeds in Denmark typically occur during the colder winter months, which
are not represented in this dataset.
These factors may help explain the relatively low wind speeds observed, but they do not alter
the validity of the previous findings on shear.
Figure 8: Wind speed versus veer, with the density of observations indicated by the color map.
Each data point is extracted from a single lidar-based 10-minute averaged wind profile.
Figure 8 shows veer as a function of wind speed, revealing a significantly different trend
compared to shear. The correlation indicates that strong veer occurs predominantly at lower
wind speeds, and this tendency is strongly pronounced. The correlation somewhat resembles a
1/x-shaped function, where large values of veer at higher wind speeds are nowhere to be found
in the dataset.
Moreover, based on the color map—and the limited observations above 15 m/s—it is also
apparent that for any wind speed above approximately 5 m/s, profiles with little or no veer are
the most commonly observed.
The cases with near 180° veer at the lowest wind speeds require additional explanation.
While measurement inaccuracies remain a possible cause, a more likely explanation lies in the
ABL dynamics. At very low wind speeds, turbulent mixing is reduced, typically leading to a
more stable atmosphere where atmospheric decoupling may occur [33]. In situations with a
very stable atmosphere, the ABL also becomes shallower, making it possible for both layers of
the decoupled atmosphere to appear within the wind profiles analyzed. Under these conditions,
extreme veer—sometimes approaching ∆WD = 180°—may be observed, however, capturing
this phenomenon might only be possible due to the inclusion of measurements above 300 m.
Had a smaller RWT been considered, with corresponding measurements limited to say 200
m, other distributions and correlations could have occurred. This hypothesis is further exam-
ined in Section 2.5, where the distributions of wind metrics are compared for the IEA 22 MW
RWT and the DTU 10 MW RWT.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
16
==PAGE:24==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 9: Shear versus veer, with the density of observations indicated by the color map. Each
data point is extracted from a single lidar-based 10-minute averaged wind profile.
Figure 9 presents the third comparison between wind metrics, showing veer as a function
of shear.
Since shear was previously found to be strongly correlated with wind speed, the
overall pattern resembles that of veer versus wind speed. Specifically, higher shear values tend
to coincide with lower veer, although the relationship is less pronounced than the correlation
between high wind speeds and low veer.
When excluding outliers and sparsely sampled regions, veer values below ∆WD < 25° dis-
play more or less the same trend for each shear bin up to ∆U = 7.5 m/s. In other words, the
majority of observations fall in the lowest veer range, while the remaining cases are more evenly
distributed across the higher veer bins.
Finally, it is worth noting that the few outliers showing wind profiles with strong veer and
shear are most likely not realistic—at least not at the Østerild test center.
2.5
Wind metric distributions for different sized wind turbines
In Section 2.4, the idea of comparing distributions of wind metrics for different rotor sizes was
introduced. The following section performs this comparison in practice.
Using the rotor spans of the IEA 22 MW RWT and the DTU 10 MW RWT—both listed
in Table 2 and visualized in Figure 10—distributions of the wind metrics from the previous
section are evaluated for both the intended rotor and a significantly smaller rotor. This allows
for an assessment of how the wind turbine size might affect the distributions of the wind metrics.
Table 2: Key metrics for the IEA 22 MW RWT [31] and the DTU 10 MW RWT [34].
IEA 22 MW RWT
DTU 10 MW RWT
Hub height [m]
170
119
Rotor diameter [m]
284
178.3
Rotor span [m]
28-312
29.85-208.15
Cut-in wind speed [m/s]
3
4
Rated wind speed [m/s]
11
11.4
Cut-out wind speed [m/s]
25
25
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
17
==PAGE:25==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 10: The rotor of the IEA 22 MW RWT and the DTU 10 MW RWT visualized at their
respective hub heights listed in Table 2.
Note that an expanded version of Figure 10 is provided in Appendix D, which includes ad-
ditional rotor sizes and the maximum measurement heights of the data sources used throughout
the thesis.
Before examining the compared wind metric distributions, it is worth noting that these two
RWTs—both publicly available—have the lowest point of their rotor at approximately the same
altitude. This results from a coincidence where the difference between tower height and blade
length is very similar for both turbines. Consequently, the main difference in the upcoming
distributions arises from the portion of the IEA 22 MW RWT rotor that extends above the tip
height of the DTU 10 MW RWT. This can also be seen visualized in Figure 10.
The wind speed distributions shown in Figure 11 do not perfectly resemble typical Weibull
distributions expected from a site like the Østerild test center. This deviation is likely due to
the reasons discussed previously in Section 2.4: using the average wind speed across the rotor
and the seasonal bias resulting from data collected over only five months. However, it is still
clear that observations of average wind speeds are still the most common.
When comparing the distributions between the two RWTs, a clear pattern emerges. For
the smaller turbine—the DTU 10 MW RWT—more observations occur in the lower wind speed
bins. These observations are shifted toward higher wind speed bins for the IEA 22 MW RWT,
which is expected because the larger turbine reaches more than 100 m above the tip height of
the smaller turbine, where wind speeds in most cases are higher.
The distributions of shear across the turbine rotors, shown in Figure 12, display a pattern
similar to that of the wind speed distributions. As with wind speed, the smaller turbine exhibits
more low-shear cases, which are shifted toward higher shear values for the larger turbine—
arguably to a slightly greater extent than what was observed for the wind speed distributions.
An important consideration for this distribution is the tower height. Most turbines do not
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
18
==PAGE:26==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 11: Wind speed distribution compared for the IEA 22 MW RWT (blue) and DTU 10
MW RWT (hashed orange). See the turbine specifications in Table 2.
Figure 12: Shear distribution compared for the IEA 22 MW RWT (blue) and DTU 10 MW
RWT (hashed orange). See the turbine specifications in Table 2.
have a one-size-fits-all tower, so the same rotor can be mounted on towers of different heights.
Had a different tower or RWT been analyzed, the resulting distribution would likely differ sig-
nificantly. For example, if a turbine with a rotor similar in size to the DTU 10 MW RWT
were mounted on a tower 50 m taller, the lowest wind speeds—typically occurring at lower
altitudes—would not be captured. As a result, the observed shear values across the distribution
would generally be lower, as the increase in wind speed at higher altitudes would likely have
less impact. More details on what a typical wind profile looks like are provided in Section 2.6.
Figure 13 presents the final of the three compared distributions, showing veer across the ro-
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
19
==PAGE:27==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 13: Veer distribution compared for the IEA 22 MW RWT (blue) and DTU 10 MW RWT
(hashed orange). See the turbine specifications in Table 2.
tors of interest.
For the smaller turbine, the DTU 10 MW RWT, the previously discussed
1/x-shaped distribution—introduced in Section 2.4 when analyzing Figure 8—is very pro-
nounced.
In contrast, the IEA 22 MW RWT shows a notable difference in the lowest veer
bin, ∆WD ∈[0°, 5°]. Approximately one third of the observations in this bin are shifted to-
ward higher veer values, leaving less of the lowest veer scenarios for further analysis. However,
the bin with the lowest veer interval still has the highest frequency of measurements even for
the IEA 22 MW RWT.
In general, all the analyzed wind metric distributions exhibit a similar trend of increasing
values for the larger turbine rotor.
This was not unexpected; however, the choice of RWT
and tower height likely played a significant role in the observed trends, which should not be
understated.
2.6
An average wind profile
Finally, to give the reader a clearer picture of what an average wind profile looks like—as briefly
touched upon in the previous section—an average shear and veer profile is presented in Fig-
ure 14. These are based on measurements where the average wind speed across the IEA 22
MW RWT rotor is in the vicinity of the rated wind speed provided in Table 2, U = Urated ± 3
m/s. It should be emphasized that these profiles are specific to the Østerild test center and
may differ considerably at other locations around the world.
Figure 14 shows a sample of shear and veer profiles from the western sector in gray, taken
near the rated wind speed of the IEA 22 MW RWT. Alongside the sampled profiles, their
average is also shown—in blue—to highlight general trends.
From the averaged shear profile, the trend described in Section 2.5 becomes clear: at lower
altitudes, the shear—i.e., the change in wind speed with height—is more pronounced, while at
higher altitudes it becomes less severe.
A similar—yet not as apparent—trend is seen for the veer profile. One might even argue
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
20
==PAGE:28==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Sampled 10-minute averaged lidar-based wind profiles (gray) from wind speeds near
the rated wind speed of the IEA 22 MW RWT (see Table 2 for reference). The mean profile
calculated from the samples is shown in blue.
Subfigure (a) shows the shear profiles, and
subfigure (b) shows the veer profiles.
that it could be approximated linearly, the effect of which will be explored in Section 3.
A final note concerns the apparent measurement errors in the last ∼100 meters for some of
the wind profiles. Since these altitudes lie well above the range of interest, they do not affect
the RWT investigated in this study. Nevertheless, additional manual filtering will be applied
when necessary to ensure that such cases are excluded from further analyses.
Appendix E provides normalized versions of the wind profiles presented in Figure 14 for
reference.
2.7
Conclusions
In this section, the dataset used throughout the thesis was introduced and analyzed to address
the first part of research question 1, which concerns classifying the lidar observations at the
Østerild test center.
Practically, this was achieved by first describing the applied filtering procedures. The fil-
tering included the removal of inaccurate or invalid measurements and wake-influenced sectors.
This was accomplished by utilizing the lidar’s built-in signal-to-noise ratio and the average wind
direction measured across the rotor of the IEA 22 MW RWT. This resulted in approximately
50% of the observations being excluded, primarily due to wake filtering, however, the western
sector—where the majority of valid measurements originate—remained unaffected.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
21
==PAGE:29==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Different methods for quantifying veer and shear were subsequently evaluated to identify a
measure that could be applied consistently to both parameters, effectively capture the observed
trends, and remain easily interpretable. For this purpose, the maximum difference measured
across the rotor span was selected.
Correlations between the key wind metrics—shear, veer, and wind speed—were then ana-
lyzed to identify underlying patterns. A strong positive correlation was found between shear
and wind speed, with shear increasing at higher wind speeds. Veer likewise showed a strong
correlation with wind speed, exhibiting an approximately 1/x-shaped trend when plotted as a
function of wind speed.
This analysis also included a discussion of the main limitations of the dataset, which were
identified as follows:
(i) Seasonal bias, since “only” five months of data (May–October) were analyzed.
(ii) Wind climate limitations, as the data were collected within a Danish wind climate, specific
to the location of the Østerild test center.
Finally, distributions of the wind metrics, as defined throughout this section, were compared
for two turbines: the IEA 22 MW RWT and the smaller DTU 10 MW RWT. The analysis
revealed a distinct shift in all distributions toward stronger values for the larger turbine. This
was partly attributed to the similar distance from the rotor edge to the surface for the two
RWTs analyzed. It is likely that a different tower height configuration would have produced a
different outcome.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
22
==PAGE:30==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
3
Using lidar-based wind profiles for load assessment on wind
turbines
3.1
Objective
The following section presents a draft paper prepared for the Torque conference in 2026. The
purpose of the paper is to cover and answer the second part of research question 1. This specifi-
cally involves investigating how high-altitude lidar measurements might impact load simulations
for the next generation of large wind turbines.
In practice, the paper investigates the effect of using different data sources as the basis for
load simulations through a case study. Specifically, it compares two approaches for extrapolating
wind profiles from limited measurement data to high-fidelity wind profiles obtained from the
Beam6X-325 lidar, in order to evaluate how data limitations influence fatigue load estimations.
The study is carried out by simulating an onshore version of the IEA 22 MW RWT using
HAWC2 and subsequently calculating the 10-minute damage equivalent loads (DELs) for a set
of load channels based on these simulations.
3.2
Conclusions
The analysis carried out in the case study showed that relying on limited data sources—whether
using only a subset of met mast measurements or none at all—led to systematic inaccuracies in
certain load channels.
When comparing the case study results—assuming the simulations using exact lidar profiles
as the baseline—the first method resulted in significant underestimations of the 10-minute
DELs for the FlpBRM (−13.2%) and YbTilt (−9.9%) load channels. This was attributed to an
underestimated shear profile and, to a lesser extent, the complete removal of the veer profile.
The second method, on the other hand, led to significant overestimations in the 10-minute
DELs for the same load channels: FlpBRM (+19.4%) and YbTilt (+3.7%). These overestima-
tions were similarly caused by inaccurate representation of the shear and veer profiles, which
consequently resulted in inaccurately characterizing the uneven loading vertically across the
rotor.
Considering the results, it was argued that both under- and overestimations of fatigue loads
could have serious consequences. Underestimating fatigue loads may lead to overestimated tur-
bine lifetimes and, consequently, premature failure. Conversely, overestimating fatigue loads
could result in an overly conservative design, increasing costs and reducing competitiveness.
Relating these conclusions back to the research question addressed in the paper, it was ar-
gued that high-fidelity data—such as lidar-based wind profiles—can provide substantial benefits
by improving the accuracy of load simulations.
3.3
Torque 2026 draft paper
The complete draft paper follows on the next page. Note that all references and citations within
the draft paper refer to figures, tables, equations, and references included in the paper itself.
Some numbering may overlap with that used in the rest of the thesis, so this should be kept in
mind when reading.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
23
==PAGE:31==
Comparing lidar-derived and conventional wind
profile extrapolations for fatigue load calculations on
large wind turbines
Frederik Bjørling Bornemann, Michael Courtney, Søren Oemann
Lind, Jesper Grossmann Hansen, and Jennifer Marie Rinker
Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej
399, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark
E-mail: s203700@student.dtu.dk
Abstract.
As wind turbines continue to grow in size, conventional meteorological (met) masts
are often too short to capture the full rotor-swept area, leading to inaccuracies in characterizing
the wind climate. This study evaluates the effect of using extrapolated wind profiles from met
mast data compared to high-fidelity lidar measurements through three case studies on the IEA
22 MW reference wind turbine. The analysis shows that extrapolation can introduce significant
inaccuracies, resulting in either under- or overestimations of the 10-minute damage equivalent
loads (DELs).
Underestimations in DELs may lead to premature turbine failure due to overestimated
lifetimes, whereas overestimations can increase costs and reduce competitiveness through
overdesigned wind turbines. These inaccuracies are primarily caused by corresponding under-
or overestimations in shear and veer, which affect the uneven loading across the rotor and, in
some cases, the average wind speed experienced by the turbine.
Overall, the findings suggest that high-fidelity wind profile data is essential for improving
the accuracy of measurements and simulations for future turbine design and operation. In this
study, low-fidelity data resulted in underestimations of up to 13.2% in certain load channels for
one case, while overestimations of up to 19.4% were observed in a separate case.
1. Introduction
When simulating wind turbines and calculating loads—fatigue loads, in this study—the use
of real-world wind climate data provides opportunities for more realistic analyses compared to
relying solely on estimates or extrapolations [1]. As wind turbines continue to increase in size,
accurately characterizing the wind climate they operate in becomes increasingly difficult due
to the blade tip heights often extending far above the height of standard meteorological (met)
masts [1–4].
This challenge is especially relevant for even larger new wind turbines, where vertical varia-
tions in wind speed and direction (shear and veer) are expected to have a significant impact on
fatigue loading. Uneven wind conditions over the rotor can lead to increased structural loads
[5, 6], making accurate wind profile representation critical.
Several studies have demonstrated that turbulence and shear play a significant role in
determining the fatigue loads acting on wind turbines. In addition, veer has been found to
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
24
==PAGE:32==
have a comparatively smaller effect, yet it remains a non-negligible factor [7, 8]. A recent study
analyzing several turbine models—including the IEA 22 MW reference wind turbine (RWT)—
actually indicated that veer can lead to a significant increase in fatigue loads for certain load
channels [9].
These observations indicate that an accurate representation of wind profiles can strongly
influence fatigue loads, as errors in either shear or veer can have a significant impact.
A previous study examined how fatigue load estimations differ when based on met mast data
compared to lidar measurements. However, the analysis focused on mean wind speeds and tur-
bulence intensity rather than detailed wind profile characteristics. Consequently, the effects of
wind profile differences between measurement sources on fatigue loads remain underexplored [10].
The objective of this study is to simulate the IEA 22 MW RWT [11] in HAWC2 using
different wind data sources to calculate the 10-minute design equivalent loads (DELs). The aim
is to assess the impact of using extrapolated wind profiles based on met mast data compared to
lidar-based profiles measured up to—and above—tip height.
2. Methodology
2.1. Data acquisition
In this study, met mast data from the light mast north (LMN) at the Østerild test center are
used. Although LMN typically provides measurements up to 244 m, only data points up to 120
m are considered here to simulate a standard met mast [12]. In addition, measurements from a
ground-based Beam6X-325 lidar are used, providing coverage up to 497 m.
These data sources enable the case studies explained in Section 2.2, where the measurements
are applied in different ways to construct wind profiles.
The wind profiles for all scenarios will be based on 10-minute averaged measurements, and,
in addition to this, high-frequency time series will be used to calculate parameters used in a
simulated Mann turbulence box.
2.2. Case studies
The study investigates the 10-minute DELs for the load channels listed in Table 1. The analysis
is performed for an onshore version of the IEA 22 MW RWT and considers three different cases:
• Case 1: α = 1/7, no veer Only the average wind speed measured over the rotor is used
to generate the wind profile. A power-law with a shear exponent of 1/7 is applied as a rule
of thumb [13], and no veer is included.
• Case 2:
Met mast extrapolations Met mast data below 120 m are used for
extrapolation.
Once again a power-law is applied to simulate the shear profile, where
the shear exponent is estimated from the wind speed measurements. The veer profile is
obtained by linear extrapolation of the wind direction measurements, then shifted such
that there is 0 degrees veer at hub height.
• Case 3:
Lidar measurements Lidar data is used directly to replicate the measured
shear and veer profiles. This allows for a higher-fidelity wind profile, as the lidar provides
measurements for approximately every 2.5 meters up to an altitude of 497 m.
These three cases are illustrated for an example wind profile in Figure 1. For this profile, it
can be seen that Cases 1 and 2 deviate from the lidar measurements when considering both the
wind speed and direction. The effect of these deviations is analyzed in the study.
The three cases are all simulated and studied using a sample of wind profiles. For each wind
speed bin between cut-in and cut-out for the IEA 22 MW RWT (3–25 m/s), up to three instances
of wind profiles are considered, or as many as are available if fewer than three. In total, this
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 1: Example of a 10-minute averaged wind profile from lidar measurements (green) and
met mast measurements (gray crosses).
The lighter crosses above 120 m are not used for
extrapolation. The extrapolated profiles for Case 1 (blue) and Case 2 (orange) are also shown,
together with the rotor span of the IEA 22 MW RWT (gray). Note that the veer profile for Case
2 is shifted to have 0 veer at hub height; thus, it does not intercept the LMN measurements.
corresponds ideally to 69 distinct wind profiles and 207 profiles when accounting for the three
cases investigated. However, because there are fewer than three—or sometimes no—observations
at the highest wind speed bins, only 55 distinct wind profiles are available and analyzed.
Table 1: Load channel descriptions investigated in the study and the corresponding W¨ohler
exponents used in Equation (1).
Abbreviation
Load channel
W¨ohler exponent
TbFA
Tower-base (fore-aft)
4
TbSS
Tower-base (side-side)
4
FlpBRM
Flapwise blade-root moment
10
EdgBRM
Edgewise blade-root moment
10
YbRoll
Yaw-bearing roll
4
YbTilt
Yaw-bearing tilt
4
ShftTrs
Shaft torsion
4
2.3. Simulation process and DEL calculation
Each different 10-minute DEL calculated will be based on the simulations using a single wind
profile—whether that is an extrapolated profile or the exact lidar profile—using 6 different
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
26
==PAGE:34==
random seeds for the turbulence generation via a Mann box. Using the 6 different simulations,
the combined DEL is calculated using Equation (1) where the material-specific W¨ohler exponents
from Table 1 are applied.
DELcombined =
 
1
N ·
N
X
i=1
(DELi)m
!1/m
(1)
N is the number of seeds generated and simulated and m is the W¨ohler exponent corresponding
to the load channel of interest.
3. Results
3.1. Observations and trends
For the subsequent analysis, Case 3: lidar measurements is taken as the “ground truth”, as this
provides a baseline against which the performance of the other cases can be evaluated.
A subset of the resulting DELs is plotted in Figure 2 where rows 1 and 3 depict the combined
DELs as the solid line with the 6 corresponding seeds marked with dots versus the averaged
wind speeds of the simulations.
For the same subset, rows 2 and 4 illustrate the relative errors with respect to Case 3, allow-
ing for a direct comparison of the deviation in DEL across the different cases.
For the subset of the sample shown in Figure 2, the DELs from Case 1 are difficult to
classify based solely on their magnitudes. However, for the yaw-bearing load channels, a slight
tendency to underestimate the loads can be observed—most clearly at the higher wind speed
bins. In addition to this, the FlpBRM load channel in particular also appears to be consistently
underestimated—once again most clearly at the highest wind speeds.
This becomes even more evident when examining the relative errors with respect to Case 3 for
these three load channels. Within this subset, only a few wind speed bins show overestimation
for FlpBRM and YbRoll, while all bins exhibit underestimation for YbTilt.
The observed trends are likely caused by underestimations of the shear profile at higher wind
speeds, along with the complete neglect of veer, which—as mentioned in the introduction—has
recently been shown to increase fatigue loads [9]. This will be examined in more detail in Sec-
tion 3.2.
The DELs from Case 2, based on extrapolated wind profiles, are less straightforward to
generalize. However, for several load channels significant overestimations occur. In particular,
the FlpBRM load channel shows wind speed bins where Case 2 produces DELs well above those
of Case 3, notably at U ∈{4, 8, 11 −13, 15 −17} m/s. In addition to these observations, there
is also a significant peak for the TbFA DEL from Case 3 at 7 m/s caused by a resonance issue,
which neither of the other cases accurately captures.
These trends are further supported by the analysis of the relative errors, which reveal
substantial overestimations. In the most extreme cases, the extrapolations from Case 2 more
than double the combined DEL. This is particularly evident at U
= 4 m/s, where the
overestimation is not limited to the FlpBRM load channel but also occurs for TbFA, TbSS,
and YbRoll.
It should be noted, however, that since these results are expressed as relative
errors and the DELs are generally smaller at low wind speeds, this observation is somewhat
skewed—though it still indicates a significant inaccuracy.
The overestimations in DELs are likely caused by corresponding overestimations in the shear
and veer profiles, resulting from the limited measurement range used when collecting the data
from the met mast for extrapolation. The exact effects will be examined following a quantitative
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2: For a subset of the entire sample: the combined 10-minute DELs (lines) and the
10-minute DELs from the six different seeds (dots) are shown versus wind speed for the load
channels described in Table 1 (rows 1 and 3). For the same simulations, the relative errors of
the combined 10-minute DELs for the three cases—considering Case 3 as the baseline i.e., the
ground truth—are also plotted (rows 2 and 4).
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
28
==PAGE:36==
analysis of the results.
To accurately understand the results and trends in the simulated sample, three statistical
measures are calculated, once again using Case 3 as the baseline. These measures are summa-
rized in Table 2, which reports the values for each load channel (recall Table 1) in both Case 1
and Case 2.
Table 2: Key statistical measures based on DELs—mean deviation from Case 3, within 5% of
Case 3, and any underestimation compared to Case 3—for Cases 1 and 2. This includes the
results explored in Figure 2 along with the results from the remainder of the sample.
Case 1: α = 1/7, no veer
Case 2: Met mast extrapolations
Metric
Mean dev. [%]
Within 5% [%]
Underest. [%]
Mean dev. [%]
Within 5% [%]
Underest. [%]
TbFA
-4.3
70.9
67.3
+1.4
60.0
65.5
TbSS
-2.3
50.9
63.6
+8.0
43.6
56.4
FlpBRM
-13.2
23.6
76.4
+19.4
16.6
34.5
EdgBRM
-0.7
100
72.7
+0.9
90.9
30.9
YbRoll
-5.7
47.3
81.8
-1.1
60.0
61.8
YbTilt
-9.9
41.8
96.4
+3.7
74.5
69.1
ShftTrs
+1.1
85.5
52.7
-1.2
56.4
47.3
From Table 2, the mean deviations reveal a clear trend: Case 1 tends to underestimate the
DELs for most load channels, whereas Case 2 generally overestimates them. This pattern is
further supported by the percentage of DELs underestimated relative to the baseline, where
Case 1 shows a higher proportion of underestimations across all seven load channels included in
the study.
When considering the percentage of observations within 5% of the baseline, neither of the
two cases performs notably better than the other. However, it is evident that the EdgBRM
load channel is largely unaffected by either method, as its loads are primarily governed by the
gravitational forces acting on the rotating blades. This is further supported by the fact that the
proportion of DELs within 5% of the baseline ranges between 90–100% for both cases.
The largest underestimations for Case 1 occur in the load channels discussed previously, with
the most pronounced underestimations observed for FlpBRM and YbTilt. These load channels
are expected to be most affected because they are directly influenced by, or closely related to,
the asymmetric aerodynamic forces acting on the blades. Consequently, underestimating the
shear through a generalized shear exponent, combined with the complete removal of veer, re-
duces these uneven loadings across the vertical span of the rotor and, in turn, the corresponding
fatigue loads.
The same reasoning can be applied to Case 2 regarding the overestimations in FlpBRM and
YbTilt, but with the opposite sign.
The shear and veer estimated from the first 120 m of
measurements are likely to overestimate these metrics at higher altitudes, where strong veer and
shear are less common than at lower altitudes.
Additionally, a significant overestimation in DELs is observed in TbSS. However, this is not
a systematic effect; rather, it is caused by a few extreme outliers, with some overestimations
approaching 300%. These occur in wind profiles where the shear extrapolation also increases
the average wind speed experienced by the rotor. This also illustrates why relative errors can
appear skewed: when filtering the results to exclude those with U < 6 m/s, the mean deviation
from Case 3 for the TbSS load channel decreases from 8.0% to -2.4%.
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
29
==PAGE:37==
Finally, it is important to consider whether the cases tend to underestimate or overestimate
the DELs, as both extremes have implications for the wind turbine. Underestimating DELs could
lead to an overestimation of the turbine’s expected lifetime, potentially resulting in safety issues
or premature failure. Conversely, overestimating DELs may result in an overly conservative
design, increasing costs and reducing competitiveness.
The general trends—based on mean deviations and percentage of DELs underestimated
compared to Case 3—show that underestimations are a more common issue in Case 1, whereas
overestimations are more pronounced in Case 2.
Additionally, when using the method described in Case 1, several load channels are notably
affected, whereas in Case 2 only FlpBRM shows significant systematic deviations. This suggests
that using even partial data, as in Case 2, may be preferable compared to relying on limited
information—such as only using the mean wind speed—in Case 1.
3.2. Analysis of contributing factors
To investigate the underlying causes of the observed results and trends, an analysis of the wind
metrics from the generated cases was carried out. Figure 3 presents a comparison of the 55 wind
profiles in the sample, showing shear, veer, and average wind speeds for Cases 1 and 2 relative
to the exact measurements from Case 3. This comparison allows for the identification of factors
contributing to the observed inaccuracies and the assessment of whether significant deviations
in the wind profiles can explain the trends observed earlier.
The red dots in Figure 3 indicate a subset of the sample observations where Case 2 signifi-
cantly overestimated FlpBRM. This includes eight of the DELs in Figure 2, specifically where
U ∈{4, 8, 11 −13, 15 −17} m/s, and examining them in detail may help solidify the cause of
the overestimations.
Figure 3a plots the shear—defined here as the maximum difference in wind speed across the
rotor span—for the extrapolated wind profiles against the same measure from the observed lidar
profile. Based on these results, three key observations can be made:
(i) Case 1 has a very strong tendency to underestimate shear at higher wind speeds.
(ii) The subset of the sample with significantly overestimated blade-root moments in Case 2
also shows a significant overestimation of shear.
(iii) Large overestimations in shear are more common than large underestimations for Case 2.
For Case 1, these results indicate that using a constant shear exponent across all wind speeds is
not viable, as it leads to significant underestimation of the shear profile—and consequently the
fatigue loads—at higher wind speeds.
For Case 2, the observations align with expectations, as stronger shear is typically more pro-
nounced at lower altitudes. Consequently, extrapolating from 120 m—the height indicating that
of a standard met mast—to the tip height of the IEA 22 MW RWT at 312 m is likely to result
in substantial deviations.
Figure 3b plots the veer, defined—analogous to shear—as the maximum difference across the
rotor span, but this time based on wind directions. For Case 2 the same overall trend observed for
shear is also present here: overestimations are generally larger than underestimations. Moreover,
this time they are also significantly more frequent.
However, the subset of the sample highlighted in red does not follow this pattern. For veer,
both over- and underestimations are observed when comparing the extrapolated wind profiles
with the lidar-based profiles, suggesting a weaker correlation with the overestimations in DELs
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
30
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Comparison of wind metrics: (a) shear, (b) veer, and (c) average wind speed for the
three cases described in Section 2.2. Case 1 is shown in blue, and Case 2 is shown in orange and
red, with red dots highlighting the outliers discussed in Section 3.1. These highlighted outliers
correspond to the wind speed bins U ∈{4, 8, 11 −13, 15 −17} m/s, as shown in Figure 2.
for these specific simulations.
Finally, Figure 3c shows the average wind speed experienced across the rotor of the IEA
22 MW RWT. While there is a clear correlation between the wind speed calculated from the
extrapolated profiles and that from the lidar-based profile, it is important to note that even a
1–2 m/s deviation can significantly affect the DELs, especially at lower wind speeds.
For Case 1, a pattern similar to that observed in the shear analysis is evident.
Using a
predetermined shear exponent results in significant underestimations of wind speed, particularly
at higher wind speeds. Do note that a higher shear exponent might improve accuracy at higher
wind speeds, however, it would likely also worsen the results at lower wind speeds.
For the subset of the sample indicated by red dots, all the instances show an overestimation
of the average wind speed across the turbine rotor, which once again aligns with the observed
overestimations in shear.
The power-law used to predict the shear profile can generally fit
the measurements at lower altitudes, but it becomes increasingly inaccurate at higher altitudes
where no measurements are available to constrain the extrapolation.
An example of such is shown in Figure 4 where the three cases are shown for one of the
instances where the FlpBRM DEL was significantly overestimated in Case 2 relative to Case 3.
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4:
Example of a wind profile where the extrapolation used in Case 2 results in a
overestimation of especially shear, but also slightly veer.
In Figure 4, the lidar-based profile reaches its maximum wind speed below 200 m, after
which the wind speed remains approximately constant.
In contrast, Case 2, based on met
mast extrapolations, assumes that the wind speed continues to increase with height and is
therefore unable to capture this behavior. This leads to a difference of approximately 7–8 m/s
at the tip height between Cases 2 and 3, representing a very significant overestimation. Such
an overestimation is expected to increase fatigue loads, particularly the FlpBRM, due to the
uneven loading experienced by the blades.
In the example from Figure 4, the linear veer extrapolation shows a smaller overestimation
and is therefore less likely to have significantly affected the DELs in the specific simulation.
4. Discussion
In this analysis, a sample based on met mast and lidar measurements from the Østerild test center
was used to calculate the resulting combined 10-minute DELs. One of the main limitations of this
study is the relatively small sample size, which may introduce some bias into the observed trends.
Although general patterns are indicative, further analysis with a larger dataset is recommended
to confirm the robustness of these findings.
Furthermore, the size of the IEA 22 MW RWT relative to the height of the chosen met mast
plays a significant role in the analysis. If a smaller RWT had been selected for the simulations,
the resulting inaccuracies would likely have been less severe.
However, this would not have
accurately reflected the implications for the future of wind turbines, as they continue to grow
in size.
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
32
==PAGE:40==
5. Conclusion
The objective of this study was to simulate the IEA 22 MW RWT [11] in HAWC2 using different
wind data sources to calculate the 10-minute DELs. The aim was then to assess the impact of
using extrapolated wind profiles based on met mast data compared to lidar-based profiles.
The analysis showed that for the test site analyzed using a generalized case with a
predetermined shear exponent and no veer led to significant underestimations of the DELs,
most notably for FlpBRM (-13.2%) and YbTilt (-9.9%). When extrapolated met mast data
were used to determine a representative shear exponent along with a linearly extrapolated veer
profile, only the FlpBRM load channel exhibited notable overestimations, with DELs increasing
by 19.9% compared to the baseline.
These results were primarily attributed to inaccuracies in shear extrapolation, with veer play-
ing a secondary role. The combined effect of these inaccuracies impacted the calculated fatigue
loads by inaccurately representing the uneven loading across the rotor.
Finally, with regard to the use of high-fidelity wind profile data, this study suggests that
it may become essential for future applications.
The cases based on met mast data and
extrapolations either led to significant underestimations, which could affect expected turbine
lifetime, or to substantial overestimations, potentially increasing costs through overdesign and
reducing competitiveness on the market.
It is evident that high-fidelity data can provide substantial benefits by improving the accuracy
of both measurements and simulations, particularly for the design and operation of future wind
turbines.
References
[1] Sommerfeld M, Crawford C, Monahan A and Bastigkeit I 2019 LiDAR-based characterization of mid-altitude
wind conditions for airborne wind energy systems Wind Energy 22 1101–1120 ISSN 1095-4244, 1099-1824
[2] Kelly M and van der Laan M P 2023 From shear to veer: theory, statistics, and practical application Wind
Energy Science 8 975–998
[3] Lundquist J K 2020 Wind Shear and Wind Veer Effects on Wind Turbines Handbook of Wind Energy
Aerodynamics ed Stoevesandt B, Schepers G, Fuglsang P and Yuping S (Cham: Springer International
Publishing) pp 1–22 ISBN 9783030054557
[4] Sathe A, Mann J, Barlas T, Bierbooms W and Van Bussel G 2013 Influence of atmospheric stability on wind
turbine loads Wind Energy 16 1013–1032 ISSN 1095-4244, 1099-1824
[5] Njiri J G and S¨offker D 2016 State-of-the-art in wind turbine control: Trends and challenges Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 60 377–393 ISSN 1364-0321
[6] Jiang Z, Karimirad M and Moan T 2014 Dynamic response analysis of wind turbines under blade pitch
system fault, grid loss, and shutdown events Wind Energy 17 1385–1409 ISSN 1095-4244, 1099-1824
[7] Robertson A N, Shaler K, Sethuraman L and Jonkman J 2019 Sensitivity analysis of the effect of wind
characteristics and turbine properties on wind turbine loads Wind Energy Science 4 479–513
[8] Dimitrov N, Kelly M C, Vignaroli A and Berg J 2018 From wind to loads: wind turbine site-specific load
estimation with surrogate models trained on high-fidelity load databases Wind Energy Science 3 767–790
ISSN 2366-7443
[9] Krathe V L, Jonkman J and Bachynski-Poli´c E E 2025 The influence of wind veer on fatigue loading for
large floating wind turbines with flexible drivetrains Wind Energy Science Discussions 2025 1–27
[10] Goit J P, Shimada S and Kogaki T 2019 Can lidars replace meteorological masts in wind energy? Energies
12 ISSN 1996-1073
[11] Zahle F, Barlas A, Loenbaek K, Bortolotti P, Zalkind D, Wang L, Labuschagne C, Sethuraman L and Barter
G Definition of the IEA wind 22-megawatt offshore reference wind turbine
[12] Solar Wheel 2025 Tilt-up met masts https://solarwheel.co.uk/tilt-up-met-masts/ accessed 14-08-2025
[13] Yang X, Jiang X, Liang S, Qin Y, Ye F, Ye B, Xu J, He X, Wu J, Dong T, Cai X, Xu R and Zeng Z
Spatiotemporal variation of power law exponent on the use of wind energy 356 122441 ISSN 0306-2619
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
33
==PAGE:41==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
4
Assessing the impact of veer and shear on fatigue loads
4.1
Objective
This section addresses research questions 3–5. The objective of research question 3 is to analyze
the effects of veer and shear on fatigue loads for the IEA 22 MW RWT. Research question 4 ex-
pands on this analysis by investigating how the effects of veer and shear compare to turbulence-
driven fatigue loads. Finally, research question 5 examines how veer- and shear induced loads
may influence the continuous growth of wind turbines.
Initially, the key differences between the simulations presented in Section 3 and those in this
section are described in Section 4.2. Generalized trends in the effects of veer and shear are then
visualized and quantified in Section 4.3.1. The isolated impacts of veer and shear are analyzed
separately in Section 4.3.2, followed by a discussion on how these findings may influence the
future growth of wind turbines in Section 4.4.
4.2
Simulation set-up
The samples generated in Section 3 were based on three different simulation approaches, specif-
ically designed to analyze the impact of using extrapolated wind profiles compared to exact
lidar measurements.
However, these three simulation setups are no longer applicable for effectively assessing the
effects of veer and shear. To address this, a new set of samples has been generated using four
updated methods that better represent the intended analysis objectives. A summary of all sam-
ples used in this thesis is provided in Table 3, followed by a detailed description of each method.
Table 3: Overview of the three samples generated using the lidar and met mast data from the
Østerild test cite. The table includes the sampling strategy as well as key differences in the
generation of .htc files. *Indicates that Case 3 and Method A are the same thing with different
labels.
Sample set
U bins [m/s]
N data samples per bin [-]
Sampling strategy
Simulations per wind profile
Sample 1:
Data source comparison
3-25
3
- Arbitrarily chosen
- No repeats
- Case 1: No data
- Case 2: Met mast extrapolation
- Case 3: Lidar data*
Sample 2:
Veer/shear analysis
3-25
4
- Arbitrarily chosen
- No repeats
- Method A: Lidar data*
- Method B: w/o veer
- Method C: w/o shear
- Method D: w/o shear/veer
Sample 3:
Precise veer/shear analysis
10-12
As many as there are
different shear scenarios
- One profile for every
∆U = 0.5 m/s
- No repeats
- Method A: Lidar data*
- Method B: w/o veer
- Method C: w/o shear
- Method D: w/o shear/veer
Table 3 explains the main differences between the three samples investigated throughout
this thesis. The most significant distinction lies in the simulation methods applied and the
sampling strategy.
The methods used to assess the influence of veer and shear are summarized as follows:
• Method A corresponds to Case 3 from Section 3. It uses the exact lidar measurements
to represent the wind profile.
• Method B removes veer—defined in Section 1.2.1 as vertical variations in wind direc-
tion. Consequently, the wind direction—disregarding turbulence from the simulated Mann
box—will be represented by the mean wind direction across the entire rotor.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
34
==PAGE:42==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
• Method C removes shear, which means that the wind speed—again disregarding turbulence—
will be represented by the mean wind speed across the entire rotor.
• Method D removes both veer and shear. This setup represents an idealized case in which
neither veer nor shear effects are present.
The sampling strategy will be explained in detail in Section 4.3.1.
To ensure clarity, the process of generating the .htc files required for running the HAWC2
simulations, a flowchart describing the process is included in Figure 15.
Figure 15 illustrates how the different cases and methods described previously are imple-
mented in practice. It also shows how the Mann box is generated using high-frequency time
series data from cup anemometers, which are more reliable than lidars for this specific purpose.
In practice, the Mann box is generated by extracting the variance from the high-frequency
time series—provided by the cup anemometers on the LMN met mast—and using it to compute
the αε parameter. The effect of this is discussed in Section 5.
To simulate the wind profile, a user_defined_shear.dat file is generated based on the
lidar measurements. This file contains a grid of normalized wind speed components that vary
with height, derived from the veer and shear profiles obtained from the lidar. In this thesis
no vertical wind component is included in the file; however, during the simulation turbulence
might still affect the vertical component.
This can be explained by referring to Section 11.17 of the HAWC2 manual [35], which
describes how the wind speed (wsp) is constructed in HAWC2. A simplified version of the defi-
nition from the HAWC2 manual—excluding elements not relevant to this section—is expressed
as:
wsp = wsp_mean*user_defined_shear + turb*scaling
Here, wsp_mean is the mean wind speed for the entire windfield, user_defined_shear rep-
resents the normalized wind speed components provided in the corresponding .dat file, turb
denotes the turbulence field from the three .bin files generated by the Mann turbulence box,
and scaling is a factor which can be applied to the turbulence. Note that when the turbulence
is generated using a representative αε parameter, no scaling is applied, in order to reproduce
approximately the same variation observed in the measured time series.
With the definitions of the samples made clear, the analysis of the results can now begin.
4.3
Results
4.3.1
Visualizing and quantifying the impact of veer and shear
To visualize the effects of veer and shear, a set of heat maps has been created for each of the
load channels described in Section 3. In these, wind speed (U) is always used as the x-axis,
while the y-axis represents either veer (∆WD) or shear (∆U). The color map indicates the
combined 10-minute DELs, which were also introduced in Section 3.
An example of this, based on Sample 1 from Table 3 for the shear variety, is shown in Fig-
ure 16. This example is included to familiarize the reader with the visualization approach—since
it will be central to the following analyses of veer and shear induced loads—and to simultane-
ously illustrate the limitations of Sample 1.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
35
==PAGE:43==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Turbulence
generation
Wind profile
generation for a
single datetime
Single .htc file
generation
Wind speed and
direction (lidar)
Wind speed and
direction (LMN)
High-frequency 
time series (LMN)
Use lidar data?
Mean wind 
speed (lidar)
Yes
Use (extrapolated) 
met mast data?
Yes
No
No
Extrapolate wind
speed and direction
from measurements
in given interval
Assume 1/7 power
law and no veer
Use high-
frequency time
series?
Assume std_scaling
of wind speed
components
Yes
No
Compute αε from time
series variance
Set up Mann
turbulence box
Wind profile
customization
Remove shear?
Remove veer?
Make wind speed
over the entire rotor
equal to the mean
wind speed
Yes
No
Make wind direction
over the entire rotor
equal to the mean
wind direction
No
Yes
Use the
measurements as is
Single .htc file
generated
Apply wind profile and
turbulence to custom
onshore IEA 22 MW
RWT .htc file
Figure 15: A flowchart used to visualize the process of generating the .htc files used for simu-
lating the IEA 22 MW RWT.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
36
==PAGE:44==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 16: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 1 described in
Table 3 and generated in Section 3. The grid is made up of wind speed (U) and shear (∆U)
bins which both have step sizes of 1 m/s.
In Figure 16 the heat map is divided using a grid of squares, where each square represents
a DEL. If more than one scenario has the same wind metrics, the color indicates the average of
all scenarios with such wind metrics. The corresponding heat map based on veer can be found
in Appendix C.
Figure 16 also illustrates why Samples 2 and 3 are necessary. When only Sample 1 is used,
the available range of shear is very limited. This is because a maximum of three data samples
per wind speed bin is available as stated in Table 3. This scarcity makes it diﬀicult to identify
any meaningful trends related to the wind metric of interest, whether that is veer or shear.
Instead, the illustration mainly reflects the effect of wind speed, but that is neither the focus of
this study, nor would such an illustration be required.
Alternatively, to ensure that the samples described in Table 3 cover a suﬀicient range in
both veer and shear, a coverage map can be used to visualize which scenarios are included in
each sample. This approach makes it possible to select appropriate samples without performing
all the required HAWC2 simulations in advance, ensuring that the chosen sample spans the
desired bins.
Note that the bin sizes used in Figure 16 and Figure 17 differ slightly. The heat maps use
slightly larger bins to make overall trends easier to observe, whereas this level of smoothing is
unnecessary for the coverage map, where a higher-resolution binning can be maintained.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
37
==PAGE:45==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: The coverage of Sample 1 described in Table 3 against different wind metrics. The
blue fields indicates that any of the data samples from the entire sample exhibits those exact
wind metrics. Subfigure (a) displays the sample based on wind speed (U) and shear (∆U) and
subfigure (b) displays the sample based on wind speed and veer (∆WD).
Figure 17 demonstrates that there are insuﬀicient data points to fully cover the range be-
tween cut-in and cut-out wind speeds for the IEA 22 MW RWT—recall Table 2—particularly
at higher wind speeds. This limitation was noted previously in Section 2.4, and its effect is now
evident. While it slightly reduces the number of scenarios available for analysis, this issue can
be circumvented using Sample 3, which will be described shortly.
It can also be observed that there are no data points between 6–7 m/s. This occurs because
the sampling was performed around specific wind speeds—e.g., 6 ± 0.5 m/s—rather than con-
tinuously across the 6–7 m/s range. In hindsight, this approach is not the most intuitive for
filtering the data, but it does not affect the subsequent analysis.
As noted from Figure 16, Sample 1 has significant limitations. To increase the density of
measurements, Sample 2 was subsequently created.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: The coverage of Sample 1 and 2 described in Table 3 against different wind metrics.
The blue fields indicates that any of the data samples from the entire sample exhibits those
exact wind metrics. Subfigure (a) displays the sample based on wind speed (U) and shear (∆U)
and subfigure (b) displays the sample based on wind speed and veer (∆WD).
Figure 18 shows the combined coverage of Samples 1 and 2. While the density of observa-
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
38
==PAGE:46==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
tions is clearly increased, analyzing the effects of veer and shear remains challenging. Random
sampling tends to follow the trends described in Section 2.4, meaning that rare cases of veer or
shear—whether unusually high or low—are still infrequently selected. As a result, the ability to
analyze veer and shear will likely remain quite low if the corresponding DELs were calculated,
similar to what was seen in Figure 16.
To obtain a more complete understanding of the effects of veer and shear, Sample 3 was
generated. This sample focuses on wind speeds near the rated wind speed of the IEA 22 MW
RWT, defined as U = Urated ± 1 m/s, where the rated wind speed is 11 m/s, recall Table 2.
Within these wind speed bins, all available shear values were selected using a step size of 0.5
m/s. This approach enables a more detailed analysis of veer and shear within this wind speed
range and avoids the issue encountered with sampling randomly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: The coverage of Sample 1, 2, and 3 described in Table 3 against different wind
metrics. The blue fields indicates that any of the data samples from the entire sample exhibits
those exact wind metrics. Subfigure (a) displays the sample based on wind speed (U) and shear
(∆U) and subfigure (b) displays the sample based on wind speed and veer (∆WD).
With the inclusion of Sample 3, the density of scenarios near the rated wind speed increases
significantly. Calculating the DELs for all scenarios included in Samples 2 and 3 enables a more
meaningful analysis of veer and shear. This approach follows the principle that reducing the
number of varying factors is essential to isolate the effect of a single parameter. By focusing
on a narrow range of wind speed bins while ensuring a wide span of either veer or shear, the
influence of these wind metrics becomes more apparent.
By combining all three samples, an updated and more comprehensive version of the heat
map previously presented in Figure 16 can be produced.
In Figure 20 the DELs for all three samples have been included. This results in a more
complete heat map, particularly around the rated wind speed—as intended. The wind speed
range covered by Sample 3 is highlighted with a red box, within which the effects of shear—and
later, veer—can be clearly analyzed.
When distinguishing between thrust- and torque-based load channels, it is diﬀicult to draw
any concrete conclusions regarding the influence of shear.
The thrust-based load channels
include TbFA, FlpBRM, and YbTilt; however, no consistent patterns can be observed across
these channels. Furthermore, the torque-based load channels—TbSS, YbRoll, and ShftTrs—
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
39
==PAGE:47==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 20: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 1, 2, and 3 described
in Table 3. The red box indicates the wind speed range that Sample 3 investigates. The grid is
made up of wind speed (U) and shear (∆U) bins which both have step sizes of 1 m/s.
show no clear trends associated with shear.
Note that EdgBRM will not be categorized as either, as it primarily depends on gravitational
forces acting on the blades during rotation.
In summary, categorizing the loads into thrust- and torque-based channels does not yield
particularly useful insights, and therefore an alternative approach is explored.
If, instead, the load channels are categorized based on their physical location or the compo-
nent they represent—namely, the tower-base, yaw-bearing, blade-root moments, and shaft—it
becomes easier to identify where shear may have an influence.
First, the Tb and Yb load channels show a general insensitivity to shear within the scenarios
from Sample 3 highlighted in the red box. However, very high DELs are observed for TbFA,
TbSS, and YbRoll in the 7–8 m/s wind speed bin. This behavior results from a resonance issue,
as the IEA 22 MW RWT does not include a minimum rotor speed. This issue is documented
in the IEA 22 MW RWT definition report and is therefore not unexpected. The report also
specifically recommends implementing a “tower resonance avoidance scheme” to mitigate the
problem [31].
Secondly, when examining the BRM load channels, a clear pattern emerges: higher shear
results in higher loads. It is worth emphasizing that this effect is more pronounced for FlpBRM
than for EdgBRM, as the latter remains largely unaffected by factors other than the gravitational
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
40
==PAGE:48==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
forces pulling on the blades as the rotor rotates. The apparent color gradient for EdgBRM within
the red box should therefore be interpreted with caution since its scale is much smaller—and
thus less significant—than for the other load channels.
The explanation for the higher loads observed in high-shear scenarios for FlpBRM is in-
tuitive. In conditions with strong shear, the blades experience substantial variations in wind
speed as they rotate, resulting in uneven and fluctuating loading in the FlpBRM time series
and, consequently, higher 10-minute DELs. The effect will be quantified later in Section 4.3.2.
Finally, when examining the ShftTrs load channel, an interesting pattern emerges in the
10–11 m/s wind speed bin, just below the rated wind speed, but only for scenarios with lower
shear. Higher DELs are observed in these conditions because this wind speed range occurs just
before the transition between control regimes. This results in the largest fluctuations in the
ShftTrs time series and, consequently, higher DELs.
This observation suggests that scenarios with stronger shear may experience smaller fluc-
tuations in the ShftTrs load channel. However, it is more likely that the effect arises from the
combined influence of both veer and shear, or that it is not directly correlated with either and
instead results from turbulence and variations in wind speed.
Figure 21: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 1, 2, and 3 described
in Table 3. The red box indicates the wind speed range that Sample 3 investigates. The grid
is made up of wind speed (U) and veer (∆WD) bins which have step sizes of 1 m/s and 2.5°
respectively.
Alternatively, when examining Figure 21 and attempting to distinguish between torque-
and thrust-based load channels, the torque-based channels again provide little concrete insight.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
41
==PAGE:49==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
In contrast, the thrust-based load channels—TbFA, FlpBRM, and YbTilt—show only a weak
gradient across the range of veer. In the FlpBRM load channel, veer appears to slightly increase
the fatigue loads, whereas for TbFA and YbTilt it appears to have the opposite effect, reducing
the fatigue loads.
Based on these observations, it is diﬀicult to draw any consistent conclusions about the
influence of veer. While the results may indicate certain trends, the effect of shear makes it
challenging to isolate veer’s individual contribution. Previous studies have shown that veer
generally has a smaller impact on loads compared to shear and turbulence.
Therefore, to
accurately assess the role of veer, the influence of these stronger factors should, where possible,
be minimized. In the following section, simulations that isolate the effects of veer and shear
are analyzed to determine whether the previously observed trends persist and to identify any
additional insights.
4.3.2
Isolating the effect of veer and shear
Because both veer and shear can vary between simulations in the previous section, it is often
diﬀicult to attribute observed effects to a single factor. As noted in Section 2.4, a wind profile
with some degree of shear may also exhibit significant veer. Therefore, this section investigates
Methods B and C, described in Table 3, in which veer and shear are completely removed to
isolate the effects of shear and veer, respectively.
Additionally, Method D—which removes both veer and shear—will be analyzed alongside
Methods B and C in a statistical comparison at the end of this section to identify any other
trends that may emerge.
Figure 22 illustrates the impact of shear on fatigue loads in simulations where veer is ex-
cluded. In practice, this is achieved by assuming a wind direction equal to the mean wind
direction across the entire rotor of the IEA 22 MW RWT. However, this does not imply that
the wind direction remains constant throughout the simulation, as turbulence will still intro-
duce directional variations.
When analyzing the effect of shear—now without the influence of veer—the overall trends
remain largely consistent with those observed in Figure 20. This is not unexpected and confirms
that the impact of shear is stronger than that of veer. Across all load channels considered in
this study, TbFA still appears to be the only one strongly affected by shear, and the removal
of veer does not alter this conclusion.
Figure 23 illustrates the impact of veer on DELs, this time with shear removed from the
HAWC2 simulations. Note that this approach assumes the mean wind speed across the entire
rotor; however, the incoming wind speeds still vary throughout the simulation due to turbulence.
The earlier observation from Section 4.3.1—that higher veer could increase fatigue loads for
certain load channels—is no longer evident in the present analysis. None of the load channels
now show such behavior. Instead, all DELs in Figure 23 exhibit a consistent trend of higher
veer being associated with reduced fatigue loads. However, even with the removal of shear, this
relationship appears to remain strongly influenced by other factors and can not be attributed
solely to veer.
As discussed in Section 2.4, an inverse correlation between wind speed and veer was identified—
that is, higher wind speeds generally correspond to lower veer. Consequently, lower veer val-
ues also tend to be associated with stronger turbulence intensity, since turbulence intensity,
TI = σU/U, is known to decrease with increasing wind speed [36].
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
42
==PAGE:50==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 22: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 2 and 3—where
simulations exclude veer i.e. assume a constant wind direction across the rotor—as described
in Table 3. The red box indicates the wind speed range that Sample 3 investigates. The grid is
made up of wind speed (U) and shear (∆U) bins which both have step sizes of 1 m/s.
Figure 24 shows, for Sample 3, the average turbulence intensity across the rotor, calcu-
lated from five wind speed nodes included in the HAWC2 simulations, plotted against the veer
measured across the rotor of the IEA 22 MW RWT for the same simulation.
This figure clearly shows that wind profiles with stronger veer are generally associated with
lower turbulence intensity. Consequently, the trends observed in Figure 23 are instead driven
by differences in turbulence rather than by veer itself, as stronger turbulence is well documented
to increase fatigue loads.
To quantitatively and more accurately explain the observations from the heat maps of the
combined 10-minute DELs—and to further investigate the actual effect of veer—the next step
involves a statistical analysis of Methods B and C, as well as Method D, which has not yet
been examined. Method D consists of simulations in which both veer and shear are removed,
thereby enabling an assessment of the isolated effect of turbulence without the influence of veer
or shear.
When both veer and shear are excluded, the previously used heat maps lose their relevance,
as they rely on variations in either parameter to reveal trends. Instead, Table 4 presents a com-
parison where the DELs from Samples 2 and 3—recall Table 3 for their definitions—simulated
using Method A serve as the baseline against which the results from the other methods are
evaluated.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
43
==PAGE:51==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure 23: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 2 and 3—where
simulations exclude shear i.e. assume a constant wind speed across the rotor—as described in
Table 3. The red box indicates the wind speed range that Sample 3 investigates. The grid
is made up of wind speed (U) and veer (∆WD) bins which have step sizes of 1 m/s and 2.5°
respectively.
Figure 24: Veer versus turbulence intensity for the scenarios included in Sample 3. Note that
this only displays the results from 1 of the 6 generated turbulence seeds.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
44
==PAGE:52==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Table 4: Key statistical measures based on DELs—mean deviation from Method A and any
underestimation compared to Method A—for Methods B, C, and D. This includes the results
explored in Figure 22 and Figure 23 along with the results from Method D which due to neither
including veer or shear can not be visually represented using the same method.
Method A: Lidar data
Method B: w/o veer
Method C: w/o shear
Method D: w/o veer/shear
Baseline
Mean dev. [%]
Underest. [%]
Mean dev. [%]
Underest. [%]
Mean dev. [%]
Underest. [%]
TbFA
-
+0.1
52.1
-2.3
75.6
-3.1
79.8
TbSS
-
+0.6
47.9
-1.5
48.7
-2.2
52.9
FlpBRM
-
-0.2
59.7
-21.0
89.9
-21.5
92.4
EdgBRM
-
-0.0
54.6
-2.6
96.6
-2.6
95.8
YbRoll
-
-0.0
53.8
-5.6
89.1
-6.2
89.1
YbTilt
-
0.2
55.5
-8.7
99.2
-9.7
98.3
ShftTrs
-
-0.3
52.9
+2.6
50.4
+2.0
53.8
Table 4 presents two statistical measures for each method relative to Method A. These mea-
sures include the mean deviation across all combined 10-minute DELs from Samples 2 and 3,
and the frequency with which the DELs are underestimated compared to Method A. A brief
note regarding the table—also mentioned in Section 3—is that, since it evaluates relative de-
viations, it may be slightly biased toward trends at lower wind speeds, where smaller DELs
generally result in larger relative deviations.
When examining the results for the simulations without veer, the previously observed trend
of decreasing DELs with increasing veer is no longer evident. As explained earlier, the gradient
shown in Figure 23 was actually caused by variations in turbulence intensity rather than by veer
itself. The results clearly indicate that the effect of veer is minimal—at least for the veer profiles
measured at the Østerild test center. None of the load channels show any significant deviations
from their corresponding simulations with veer included, and the proportion of underestimations
to overestimations remains close to 50/50 across all investigated channels.
Even when considering the 5th and 95th percentiles of the mean deviations across all simula-
tions in Samples 2 and 3, only a few load channels—namely TbFA, TbSS, and YbTilt—exhibit
deviations exceeding 3% in magnitude.
When analyzing the scenarios in which shear is removed, an expected pattern emerges.
The FlpBRM loads are significantly underestimated, which aligns with the previously discussed
explanation that strong shear substantially alters the wind speeds near the tip height and close
to the surface. This variation leads to highly uneven loading on the blades and a pronounced
cyclic effect, thereby increasing the FlpBRM fatigue loads. Most of the other load channels
are not significantly affected—particularly EdgBRM, despite the heat maps presented earlier
potentially suggesting otherwise.
Another noteworthy observation concerns the YbTilt load channel. While shear previously
did not appear to have a direct influence on this load channel in Figure 25b, its removal clearly
has an effect. Once again, this is most likely due to the removal of shear decreasing the variation
across the rotor. Moreover, it is important to consider the angle of attack (α). When shear
is removed, the fluctuations in angle of attack—and consequently in the lift-to-drag ratio—are
reduced. As a result, the magnitude of the thrust fluctuations experienced by the rotor also
decreases, which ultimately decreases the fatigue loading.
Another factor which could also influence this result, is the rotor precone angle of 4° and
shaft tilt angle of 6° for the IEA 22 MW RWT [31]. These parameters are not optimized for
operation in a wind climate without shear—because it is an unrealistic condition under normal
atmospheric circumstances—however, the exact effect is not quantified.
Finally, the DELs for the YbRoll load channel are also observed to decrease slightly upon
the removal of shear.
Examination of the controller outputs from the HAWC2 simulations
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
45
==PAGE:53==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
shows that the filtered wind speed—and also the rotor speed—are slightly lower in the scenar-
ios without shear, despite applying the average wind speed across the entire rotor. This can be
explained by the fact that the wind speed at hub height is typically slightly greater than the av-
eraged wind speed across the rotor due to significantly lower wind speeds near the surface. The
resulting reduction in wind speed consequently alters the controller strategy slightly, thereby
decreasing the torque and subsequently the fatigue loads, although not to the same extent as
for the two previously discussed load channels.
Finally, analyzing the results from Method D clarifies the isolated effect of turbulence—
of course also including gravitational and rotational effects—without interference from veer or
shear. The DELs obtained from Method D exhibit approximately the additive effect of Methods
B and C combined, as expected. Because the removal of veer had an insignificant effect on the
DELs, while the removal of shear primarily affected the FlpBRM and YbTilt load channels—
and to a lesser extent the YbRoll—only these three channels show mean deviations that differ
noticeably from the baseline.
Based on these findings neglecting veer, and more importantly shear, can lead to substantial
inaccuracies in fatigue load estimation for a turbine such as the IEA 22 MW RWT. Nevertheless,
the results also confirm that turbulence—as well as gravitational and rotational effects—remains
the dominant contributor to the fatigue loads across all channels, as none exhibit deviations
anywhere near 50%.
This specific topic—the effect of turbulence—is further explored in Appendix B, where
Sample 3 is quantitatively compared for simulations with and without turbulence entirely.
4.3.3
Consequence of disregarding veer
The influence of veer on fatigue loads has been mentioned several times throughout the previous
section. In general, veer can be defined as a vertical variation in wind direction, which effectively
causes the inflow wind speed to decrease with increasing distance from the nacelle.
This occurs because the turbine’s yaw alignment is conventionally based on wind direction
measurements taken by a nacelle-mounted wind vane [37]. Consequently, for blades with lengths
of 138 m, a substantial variation in wind direction can exist across the rotor.
This section aims to visualize this effect and discuss additional implications of veer on tur-
bine loading.
Figure 25 presents two scenarios based on the same wind profile: the first subfigure shows
the wind profile including veer, while the second excludes it. The wind profiles are visualized
using wind speed vectors (u, v), where the inflow wind speed corresponds to the u component.
When veer is removed, it becomes evident that the further from the nacelle the wind is
measured, the greater the overestimation of the inflow velocity. In this specific scenario, near tip
height, excluding veer leads to an overestimation of the incoming wind speed by approximately
0.7 m/s. Moreover, this simplification neglects the v component entirely, which also slightly
influences the relative velocity experienced by the blades.
Removing veer consequently increases the wind speed near the edge of the rotor, which in
this scenario also leads to an increase in shear. This specific effect has been explained in previ-
ous works [38].
Another effect of disregarding veer is a change in the inflow angle (ϕ) particularly near
the edge of the rotor, where the wind speed vectors change the most. However, since these
deviations occur primarily at the blade tips, the rotational speed is the main contributor to the
relative wind speed experienced, and therefore this is considered a secondary effect.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
46
==PAGE:54==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: 3D graphics displaying the wind speed components (u and v)—as blue vectors—for
a wind profile with strong veer. The rotor of the IEA 22 MW RWT is also shown in gray.
Subfigure (a) displays the wind speed vectors of the wind profile based on their true direction.
Subfigure (b) displays the wind speed vectors again, but assumes no veer i.e. the same wind
direction for all measured wind speeds in the wind profile.
An example of how the inflow angle changes based on the scenario presented in Figure 25 is
calculated below using the wind speed vectors measured at the highest altitude, at r = 137 m.
For simplicity, the calculation assumes operation at the rated rotor speed (ω = 7.06 RPM ≈
0.74 rad/s [31]) along with an optimal induction factor (a = 1/3) and no axial induction factor
(a′ = 0):
ϕ = tan–1

u · (1 – a)
ω · r · (1 + a′) + v

(9)
⇒
∆ϕ = ϕno veer – ϕreal = tan–1
 uno veer · (1 – a)
ω · r · (1 + a′) + 0

– tan–1

u · (1 – a)
ω · r · (1 + a′) + v

= 0.49° (10)
When veer is removed, the inflow angle in this scenario increases by approximately 0.5°, causing
a corresponding change in the angle of attack (α). As a result, the lift coeﬀicient (Cl) increases
slightly above the design lift coeﬀicient. This is expected to cause a small increase in fatigue
loads, as the cyclic variation in loading grows due to the higher lift near the blade tips along
the vertical span.
Based on these explanations, veer could potentially influence fatigue loads; however, as
shown in the previous section, this effect appears to be very minor.
This conclusion is, of
course, limited to the veer profiles measured at the Østerild test center, but veer is generally
not found to be a major contributor to fatigue loading.
It should also be noted that even if veer had a stronger influence on fatigue loads, its
inverse correlation with turbulence intensity would likely offset this effect. In real wind climates,
stronger veer generally coincides with lower turbulence intensity, which exerts a much greater
influence on fatigue loading.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
47
==PAGE:55==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
4.4
On the continuous growth of wind turbines and the impact thereof
It has now been shown how both shear and, to a much lesser extent, veer can influence the
fatigue loads of wind turbines—either directly, as in the case of shear affecting the FlpBRM
load channel, or indirectly, where neglecting veer may lead to small overestimations in inflow
wind speed near the rotor edge. Understanding how these effects scale with increasing rotor
size is therefore crucial for the design of future wind turbines.
For this consideration, the key factor is the vertical span covered by the rotor. Consequently,
one of the main takeaways from Section 2.5 remains valid: the tower height itself plays a crucial
role. If future wind turbines employ taller towers relative to the increase in blade length, the
severity of uneven loading may be reduced, as the strongest gradients in wind direction and
wind speed—veer and shear—typically occur close to the surface.
However, even if tower heights are optimized for the next generation of turbines—which may
feature rotor diameters exceeding 300 m—completely avoiding veer and shear across the rotor
will be impossible. These effects will therefore continue to influence fatigue loads and neglecting
them can lead to significant issues. Overestimations of fatigue loads may result in unnecessary
conservative and costly designs, whereas underestimations could cause premature failures due
to overpredicted turbine lifetimes.
4.5
Conclusions
In this section, the simulation samples used throughout the thesis were presented together and
their key differences explained. In addition, the limitations of the sample generated for the
analysis in Section 3 were outlined, particularly in relation to investigating the effects of veer
and shear on fatigue loads.
After establishing the different samples along with their respective strengths and weaknesses,
a method for visualizing the effects of veer and shear on fatigue loads was introduced. Heat
maps were used to display wind speed (U) on the x-axis and either veer (∆WD) or shear (∆U)
on the y-axis, where color gradients could then illustrate how these wind metrics affect the
fatigue loads—specifically the combined 10-minute DELs.
To first answer research question 3, regarding the effects of veer and shear on fatigue loads,
several correlations were identified between key wind metrics and the resulting fatigue loads
acting on the IEA 22 MW RWT:
(i) Shear was found to significantly increase fatigue loads for several load channels, including
FlpBRM, YbTilt, and to a lesser extent YbRoll. The effect on FlpBRM was attributed
to uneven loading on the blades during rotation, with the removal of shear resulting in an
average 21% reduction in the combined 10-minute DELs for the wind profiles analyzed.
(ii) The removal of shear was also found to decrease the YbTilt and YbRoll DELs by 8.7% and
5.6% on average, respectively. These reductions can be attributed to decreased variations
in thrust—caused by smaller fluctuations in angle of attack, which in turn affect the lift-
to-drag ratio—as well as a slight reduction in the wind speed perceived by the controller,
which slightly alters the control strategy applied, consequently decreasing torque. The
latter occurs because the average wind speed across the rotor is typically slightly lower
than the wind speed at hub height—at least at the site investigated.
(iii) In comparison, veer was not found to strongly influence fatigue loads from any load chan-
nels. However, due to its inverse correlation with turbulence intensity, conditions with
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
48
==PAGE:56==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
strong veer are likely to coincide with weaker turbulence and therefore reduced fatigue
loading.
In general, simplifying wind profiles by removing shear—and, to a much lesser extent, veer—
leads to significant underestimations for certain load channels. This could have serious conse-
quences for wind turbine design and operation, as it may result in overestimated lifetimes.
The analysis also addressed research question 4, which aimed to compare the effects of veer
and shear with turbulence-driven fatigue loads. The results showed that both shear and veer
remain less significant than turbulence in their overall influence on fatigue loads. This was
highlighted when the inverse correlation between veer and turbulence intensity was examined.
Finally, to answer research question 5, it was explained how the continuous growth in turbine
size will make it impossible to completely avoid veer and shear across the rotor of future wind
turbines—even if tower heights are optimized to minimize exposure to the lowest altitudes,
where such variations are most pronounced. Consequently, accurately representing the wind
climate—and specifically the vertical wind profiles—will be essential for the design, operation,
and analysis for the next generation of wind turbines.
5
Discussion
This section discusses the key limitations of the methods used in this thesis and how these may
have influenced the results. It also outlines potential directions for future research building on
the work presented here.
The thesis made use of real wind climate data in the HAWC2 simulations. This approach
has a clear advantage over purely numerical analyses exploring parameter ranges, as it ensures
that the simulated conditions reflect realistic atmospheric scenarios. However, it also introduces
limitations related to the availability and representativeness of the measured data. As discussed
in Section 2.4, the five months of available measurements included relatively few observations
at higher wind speeds.
This limitation was again encountered in the analysis presented in Section 3, where the
number of wind profiles with a high average wind speed—relative to the cut-out wind speed
of the IEA 22 MW RWT—was insuﬀicient to generate the full desired sample of scenarios.
Consequently, trends at the highest wind speeds could not be explored fully, which may have
reduced the ability to assess fatigue loading under such operating conditions.
Conversely, the use of real wind climate data also enabled an investigation into the corre-
lation between veer and turbulence intensity. This analysis revealed that although veer may
have a minor direct influence on fatigue loads, strong veer is typically associated with lower
turbulence intensity, which in turn reduces fatigue loading to a much greater extent.
Such
insights might not have been captured through purely statistically generated wind scenarios.
In addition, the findings of this thesis are naturally limited to the wind condition charac-
teristics at the Østerild test center. This may exclude certain wind climate types that occur in
other regions and highlights the potential value of conducting similar analyses using data from
different locations.
Similarly, the choice of using a custom αε parameter when generating the Mann turbulence
box was found to have a significant influence on the resulting fatigue loads.
Figure 26 compares a 10-minute time series of wind speed (U) generated in HAWC2 to
measurements from the LMN cup anemometers at a 50 m altitude. The two subfigures clearly
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
49
==PAGE:57==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: Time series of wind speed comparing measurements from the LMN met mast with
a simulated time series from HAWC2. Subfigure (a) shows the simulated time series using an
αε value calculated from the standard deviation extracted from the LMN measurements, while
subfigure (b) applies the standard turbulence scaling provided in HAWC2.
illustrate that implementing a custom αε value achieves the intended effect.
In the simulated time series using the custom αε parameter, the standard deviation of the
wind speed closely matches that of the LMN measurements. In contrast, when applying the
default turbulence scaling provided in HAWC2, the resulting standard deviation is considerably
higher, leading to an overestimation of turbulence intensity compared to the measurements.
Although this adjustment is important for ensuring that the simulated scenarios accurately
represent the measured conditions, the overall influence on the trends is expected to be limited.
Since either turbulence model would have been applied consistently across all simulations, the
main impact would be a general increase in DELs due to higher turbulence levels, without
substantially altering the observed trends related to veer and shear.
Generally another important aspect to consider when analyzing fatigue loads is the use of
lifetime equivalent fatigue loads. For instance, the IEC 61400-1:2019 standard prescribes repre-
senting the 10-minute averaged wind speeds using a Rayleigh distribution [26]. This distribution
can then be combined with the corresponding 10-minute DELs at each wind speed to obtain a
lifetime-equivalent DEL. The relationship can be expressed as:
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
50
==PAGE:58==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Req, L =
 N
X
i=1
 ni
neq
· DELm
combined, i
!1/m
(11)
Where ni is the number of cycles spent in one wind speed bin, estimated for example using
the Rayleigh distribution, neq is the lifetime equivalent cycles, and m is once again the Wöhler
exponent.
In practice, this approach estimates a weighted average based on the calculated
10-minute DELs and is commonly used as a representative measure in fatigue load analyses.
However, this method was not applied in the present thesis due to the large discrepancies
observed between individual simulations. Using averaged DELs across wind speed bins could
mitigate some of this variation, but the sampled scenarios would still have a substantial in-
fluence on the result. Therefore, analyses focused on more comparable simulations with fewer
changing factors are considered more meaningful for estimating lifetime-equivalent loads.
While this thesis focused specifically on fatigue loading, several related topics influenced by
veer and shear remain unexplored. In particular, since shear was found to have a significant
impact on fatigue loads in the blade-root moment channels, it is reasonable to expect that it
could also affect physical parameters such as tower clearance. Generally, this is not expected
to pose a major problem, as shear typically results in stronger wind speeds further from the
tower—at higher altitudes. However, cases with negative shear could present different challenges
and therefore warrant further investigation.
In addition, future analyses could be extended to include ultimate loads, as both veer and
shear may also influence these extreme loading conditions.
Furthermore, since one of the main conclusions of this thesis highlights the importance of
accurately measuring and representing wind climates—and specifically wind profiles—for new
large wind turbines, several special cases could be worthwhile to investigate further. These
include scenarios such as negative shear, low-level jets, and a more detailed examination of the
differences between veering and backing—i.e., veer in the opposite direction.
Such analyses would be particularly relevant for future turbine designs with increasingly
large rotor spans, which are more likely to encounter complex and varied wind profile condi-
tions.
6
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to investigate future wind turbines with large rotors and even greater tip
heights. Specifically, it focused on characterizing and analyzing wind climate data from the
Østerild test center, including both measurements from the LMN met mast and the Beam6X-
325 ground-based lidar. The thesis further sought to incorporate these wind climate data into
HAWC2 simulations of the IEA 22 MW RWT to examine how veer and shear may affect large
wind turbines. In particular, the focus was on how these metrics influence fatigue loading, with
secondary consideration given to their comparison with turbulence-induced fatigue loads. This
was achieved through the formulation and investigation of five research questions.
The first part of research question 1 focused on classifying and analyzing lidar-based mea-
surements as a precursor to the load analyses, with the aim of identifying trends and phenomena
of potential relevance for further investigation.
The classification of observations at the Østerild test center revealed clear relationships
between the key wind metrics—veer, shear, and wind speed. In particular, a strong positive
correlation was found between shear and average wind speed, while veer exhibited a pronounced
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
51
==PAGE:59==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
inverse correlation with wind speed. The main cause for high veer at lower wind speeds was
argued to be more stable atmospheres.
In addition to this, the dataset used throughout the thesis was examined along with its
limitations. The primary limitation identified was the relatively small number of observations
at higher wind speeds—particularly relative to the cut-out wind speed of the IEA 22 MW RWT.
This was mainly a consequence of wake filtering, the use of rotor-averaged wind speeds, and the
restricted observation period of five months, which introduced a degree of seasonality bias.
Moreover, the analysis examined how turbine size influences the wind climate it experiences—
more specifically, the vertical wind profiles—and showed a clear tendency for larger turbines
to encounter stronger veer, shear, and average wind speeds compared to smaller turbines. An
additional conclusion drawn from this was that, while veer and shear are generally unavoidable
for new wind turbines due to their large rotor spans, the selected tower height may also influence
the extent to which the turbine is exposed to near-surface wind conditions.
The second part of the first research question involved analyzing how high-altitude lidar
measurements might impact load simulations for large wind turbines.
This was addressed
in Section 3, where a case study was conducted using a sample of simulated wind climates
with varying levels of wind profile fidelity. The study demonstrated that the FlpBRM load
channel—and, to a lesser extent, the yaw-bearing load channels—were strongly affected by
the simplification of wind profiles based on met mast extrapolations compared to lidar-derived
profiles. In one case, the 10-minute DELs for the FlpBRM were underestimated by an average of
13.2%, while in another they were overestimated by 19.4%. These discrepancies were attributed
primarily to inaccuracies in the shear profile and, to a lesser extent, to mischaracterization of
the veer profile.
This analysis also highlighted the importance of accurately capturing the vertical wind pro-
file. Underestimations of fatigue loads can be particularly problematic, as they can lead to
overestimated turbine lifetimes, while overestimations can result in unnecessarily conservative
designs, increased costs, and reduced market competitiveness.
The second research question concerned the implementation of measurements from the
Beam6X-325 lidar for use in HAWC2 simulations of the IEA 22 MW RWT. This was achieved
by extracting 10-minute averaged wind profiles from the lidar and applying these directly in
the simulations. The high-frequency time series from the lidar were decided to be undesirable
compared to the high-frequency measurements provided by the cup anemometers of the LMN
met mast because of the lower accuracy of lidar measurements for such a purpose.
Therefore, the high-frequency time series from the met mast were used to derive the vari-
ation in wind speed, from which the αε parameter was calculated and subsequently applied in
the Mann turbulence box generation. This approach ensured that the simulations incorporated
not only the observed wind profiles but also representative turbulence characteristics, providing
a more realistic depiction of the wind climate at the Østerild test center.
The third research question aimed to assess the effect of veer and shear on fatigue loads for
the IEA 22 MW RWT. To address this, two additional samples were generated and analyzed in
Section 4.
The analysis showed that shear had a strong influence on the fatigue loads of the FlpBRM
load channel. Increased shear resulted in higher fatigue loads due to the more uneven wind
conditions experienced by the blades as they rotated, leading to greater cyclic variations. This
effect was quantified by comparing identical scenarios with and without shear. When shear was
removed and the mean wind speed was applied uniformly across the rotor, the 10-minute DELs
for the FlpBRM load channel decreased by an average of 21%.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
52
==PAGE:60==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
In addition, the yaw-bearing load channels—YbTilt and YbRoll—also exhibited notable
reductions in fatigue loads when shear was removed, with average decreases of 8.7% and 5.6%,
respectively. The reduction in DELs for the YbTilt load channel can be attributed to decreased
fluctuations in the angle of attack—which determines the lift-to-drag ratio—and wind speed.
Consequently, the thrust experienced by the rotor exhibited smaller variations, leading to a
reduction in the YbTilt DELs.
The decrease in DEL for the YbRoll channel was explained by the wind speed—and rotor
speed—perceived by the controller, which were found to be slightly lower in scenarios without
shear. This occurred because the wind profile used in the simulations without shear was based
on the rotor-averaged wind speed, which is typically slightly lower than the wind speed at hub
height applied by the controller. The resulting reduction in wind speed led to a slight decrease
in torque—because of a slightly altered controller strategy—and consequently, in the 10-minute
DELs for the YbRoll load channel.
With respect to veer, the analysis initially suggested that stronger veer might lead to de-
creased fatigue loads. However, this effect was later shown to result from the inverse correlation
between veer and turbulence intensity. Because the wind climates were accurately represented
in the simulations, scenarios with high veer also exhibited lower turbulence intensities. This, in
turn, led to a notable reduction in fatigue loads. When veer was analyzed independently, its
removal did not produce any significant changes in the load channels investigated.
Consequently, fatigue loads can generally be expected to be lower in high-veer wind climates—
but not due to the veer itself, rather as a secondary effect of its inverse relationship with tur-
bulence intensity.
This observation also contributed directly to answering the fourth research question.
It
demonstrated that, in comparison to turbulence-induced fatigue loads, the effects of veer—and
even shear, despite its stronger influence on the loads—are comparatively less significant. In
other words, turbulence remains a more important factor when considering fatigue loads, with
the impacts of veer and shear occurring on a much smaller scale.
Finally, the continuous growth in wind turbine rotor sizes was discussed in relation to the
fifth research question, with a focus on how veer and shear may affect future designs. The
discussion reaﬀirmed that completely avoiding veer and shear for future large rotors will be
impossible. As rotor spans approach and exceed 300 m, uneven inflow conditions across the
rotor become inevitable. The results further indicate that accurately representing the shear
profile is particularly important, as it has a significant impact on the fatigue loads of the
FlpBRM load channel, as well as lesser impacts on the yaw-bearing load channels.
While veer was not found to have the same level of impact, it is important to recognize one
of the key limitations of this thesis: the analysis is site-specific to the observations from the
Østerild test center. Consequently, veer profiles from other locations may differ substantially
and could have a more pronounced effect on fatigue loading.
Using data from the Østerild test center, the effects of veer and shear have been thoroughly
investigated, and their importance for large wind turbine rotors—such as that of the IEA 22
MW RWT—has been clearly demonstrated. The analysis highlighted the necessity of accurately
representing wind climates, particularly vertical wind profiles, which was made possible through
the use of lidar-based wind data.
Building on these findings, further analyses of large wind turbines are recommended—
extending the scope to include ultimate load assessments and incorporating wind data from
other test sites with different wind climates.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
53
==PAGE:61==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the
writing process
During the writing of this thesis ChatGPT has been used for proofreading to ensure adequate
grammar and for various programming tasks. All generated content has been reviewed and
edited as needed, and I—the author—take full responsibility for the content produced through-
out the thesis.
References
[1]
B. Qian, K. Zhou, X. Gao, and W. Liu. “Torque Transmission Law of Wind Turbine Drive
System under the Excitation of Uneven Wind Load”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 2218.1 (Mar. 2022), p. 012057. issn: 1742-6588, 1742-6596. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/2218/1/012057. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-
6596/2218/1/012057 (visited on 05/29/2025).
[2]
J. G. Njiri and D. Söffker. “State-of-the-art in wind turbine control: Trends and chal-
lenges”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 60 (July 2016), pp. 377–393. issn:
1364-0321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.110. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032116001404 (visited on 05/29/2025).
[3]
N. Sergiienko, L. Da Silva, E. Bachynski-Polić, B. Cazzolato, M. Arjomandi, and B. Ding.
“Review of scaling laws applied to floating offshore wind turbines”. en. In: Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 162 (July 2022), p. 112477. issn: 13640321. doi: 10.1016/
j.rser.2022.112477. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S1364032122003811 (visited on 05/28/2025).
[4]
M. Kelly and M. P. van der Laan. “From shear to veer: theory, statistics, and practical
application”. In: Wind Energy Science 8.6 (2023), pp. 975–998. doi: 10.5194/wes-8-
975-2023. url: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/8/975/2023/.
[5]
U. Støttrup-Andersen. “Masts and towers”. In: Symposium of the International Associ-
ation for Shell and Spatial Structures (50th. 2009. Valencia). Evolution and Trends in
Design, Analysis and Construction of Shell and Spatial Structures: Proceedings. Editorial
Universitat Politècnica de València, 2009.
[6]
J. K. Lundquist. “Wind Shear and Wind Veer Effects on Wind Turbines”. en. In: Handbook
of Wind Energy Aerodynamics. Ed. by B. Stoevesandt, G. Schepers, P. Fuglsang, and S.
Yuping. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 1–22. isbn: 9783030054557.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-05455-7_44-1. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-05455-7_44-1 (visited on 05/29/2025).
[7]
A. Sathe, J. Mann, T. Barlas, W. Bierbooms, and G. Van Bussel. “Influence of atmospheric
stability on wind turbine loads”. en. In: Wind Energy 16.7 (Oct. 2013), pp. 1013–1032.
issn: 1095-4244, 1099-1824. doi: 10.1002/we.1528. url: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/we.1528 (visited on 05/29/2025).
[8]
M. Sommerfeld, C. Crawford, A. Monahan, and I. Bastigkeit. “LiDAR‐based character-
ization of mid‐altitude wind conditions for airborne wind energy systems”. en. In: Wind
Energy 22.8 (Aug. 2019), pp. 1101–1120. issn: 1095-4244, 1099-1824. doi: 10.1002/we.
2343. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/we.2343 (visited on
06/10/2025).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
54
==PAGE:62==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
[9]
Z. Jiang, M. Karimirad, and T. Moan. “Dynamic response analysis of wind turbines
under blade pitch system fault, grid loss, and shutdown events”. en. In: Wind Energy 17.9
(Sept. 2014), pp. 1385–1409. issn: 1095-4244, 1099-1824. doi: 10.1002/we.1639. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/we.1639 (visited on 05/29/2025).
[10]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Wind measurement - Application of ground-
mounted remote sensing technology. IEC 61400-50-2:2022. Standard. 2022.
[11]
B. J. Vanderwende, J. K. Lundquist, M. E. Rhodes, E. S. Takle, and S. L. Irvin. “Observing
and Simulating the Summertime Low-Level Jet in Central Iowa”. en. In: Monthly Weather
Review 143.6 (June 2015), pp. 2319–2336. issn: 0027-0644, 1520-0493. doi: 10.1175/MWR-
D-14-00325.1. url: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/MWR-D-14-00325.1
(visited on 05/28/2025).
[12]
Z. Shu, Q. Li, Y. He, and P. W. Chan. “Investigation of Marine Wind Veer Characteristics
Using Wind Lidar Measurements”. In: Atmosphere 11.11 (2020). issn: 2073-4433. doi:
10.3390/atmos11111178. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4433/11/11/1178.
[13]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Power performance measurements of electric-
ity producing wind turbines. IEC 61400-12-1:2022. Standard. 2022.
[14]
B. O. Hansen, M. Courtney, and N. G. Mortensen. Wind Resource Assessment – Østerild
National Test Centre for Large Wind Turbines. English. Denmark: DTU Wind Energy,
2014.
[15]
B. H. Jørgensen, P. H. Jensen, and N.-E. Clausen. Østerild Test Center: Lessons Learned
in Setting up a Wind Test Center for Offshore Wind Energy. English. DTU Wind Energy
E E-0205. Denmark: DTU Wind Energy, 2020.
[16]
A. Peña. “Østerild: A natural laboratory for atmospheric turbulence”. en. In: Journal
of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 11.6 (Nov. 2019), p. 063302. issn: 1941-7012. doi:
10.1063/1.5121486. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jrse/article/11/6/063302/
284815/Osterild-A-natural-laboratory-for-atmospheric (visited on 06/19/2025).
[17]
Lumibird. Stream Line Beam6x LiDAR Wind Profiler User Manual. Accessed: 2025-06-19.
2023.
[18]
E. Juul and R. Møller. S4018A ØSTERILD OMN ARRANGEMENT DRAWING 250m.
2022.
[19]
S. P. Arya. “Micrometeorology and Atmospheric Boundary Layer”. en. In: pure and applied
geophysics 162.10 (Oct. 2005), pp. 1721–1745. issn: 1420-9136. doi: 10.1007/s00024-
005- 2690 - y. url: https://doi. org/10.1007/s00024- 005- 2690- y (visited on
06/15/2025).
[20]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Wind measurement - Application of meteo-
rological mast, nacelle and spiller mounted instruments. IEC 61400-50-1:2022. Standard.
2022.
[21]
M. Optis, A. Monahan, and F. C. Bosveld. “Limitations and breakdown of Monin–
Obukhov similarity theory for wind profile extrapolation under stable stratification”.
en. In: Wind Energy 19.6 (June 2016), pp. 1053–1072. issn: 1095-4244, 1099-1824. doi:
10.1002/we.1883. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/we.1883
(visited on 06/15/2025).
[22]
M. Optis, A. Monahan, and F. C. Bosveld. “Moving Beyond Monin–Obukhov Similarity
Theory in Modelling Wind-Speed Profiles in the Lower Atmospheric Boundary Layer un-
der Stable Stratification”. en. In: Boundary-Layer Meteorology 153.3 (Dec. 2014), pp. 497–
514. issn: 0006-8314, 1573-1472. doi: 10.1007/s10546-014-9953-z. url: http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/s10546-014-9953-z (visited on 06/15/2025).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
55
==PAGE:63==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
[23]
W. Gutierrez, A. Ruiz-Columbie, M. Tutkun, and L. Castillo. “Impacts of the low-level
jet’s negative wind shear on the wind turbine”. In: Wind Energy Science 2.2 (2017),
pp. 533–545. doi: 10.5194/wes-2-533-2017. url: https://wes.copernicus.org/
articles/2/533/2017/.
[24]
B. T. E. Olsen, A. N. Hahmann, N. G. Alonso-de-Linaje, M. Žagar, and M. Dörenkämper.
“Low-level jets in the North and Baltic Seas: Mesoscale Model Sensitivity and Climatol-
ogy”. In: EGUsphere 2024 (2024), pp. 1–49. doi: 10.5194/egusphere-2024-3123. url:
https://egusphere.copernicus.org/preprints/2024/egusphere-2024-3123/.
[25]
S. Basu. “A simple recipe for estimating atmospheric stability solely based on surface‐layer
wind speed profile”. en. In: Wind Energy 21.10 (Oct. 2018), pp. 937–941. issn: 1095-4244,
1099-1824. doi: 10.1002/we.2203. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/we.2203 (visited on 06/16/2025).
[26]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Design requirements. IEC 61400-1:2019. Stan-
dard. 2019.
[27]
V. L. Krathe, J. Jonkman, and E. E. Bachynski-Polić. “The influence of wind veer on
fatigue loading for large floating wind turbines with flexible drivetrains”. In: Wind Energy
Science Discussions 2025 (2025), pp. 1–27. doi: 10.5194/wes-2025-92. url: https:
//wes.copernicus.org/preprints/wes-2025-92/.
[28]
A. N. Robertson, K. Shaler, L. Sethuraman, and J. Jonkman. “Sensitivity analysis of the
effect of wind characteristics and turbine properties on wind turbine loads”. In: Wind
Energy Science 4.3 (Oct. 2019), pp. 479–513. doi: 10.5194/wes- 4- 479- 2019. url:
https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/4/479/2019/.
[29]
N. Dimitrov, M. C. Kelly, A. Vignaroli, and J. Berg. “From wind to loads: wind turbine
site-specific load estimation with surrogate models trained on high-fidelity load databases”.
English. In: Wind Energy Science 3.2 (Oct. 2018), pp. 767–790. issn: 2366-7443. doi: 10.
5194/wes-3-767-2018. url: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/3/767/2018/
(visited on 05/29/2025).
[30]
N. Dangi, W. Yu, J. Sodja, and C. S. Ferreira. “Aeroelastic analysis of a very large wind
turbine in various atmospheric stability conditions”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 2767.5 (June 2024), p. 052026. issn: 1742-6588, 1742-6596. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/2767/5/052026. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-
6596/2767/5/052026 (visited on 06/16/2025).
[31]
F. Zahle, A. Barlas, K. Loenbaek, P. Bortolotti, D. Zalkind, L. Wang, C. Labuschagne, L.
Sethuraman, and G. Barter. Definition of the IEA Wind 22-Megawatt Offshore Reference
Wind Turbine. Technical University of Denmark, 2024. doi: 10.11581/DTU.00000317.
url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/definition-of-the-iea-wind-22-
megawatt-offshore-reference-wind-tu (visited on 09/06/2025).
[32]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Power performance - Assessment of obstacles
and terrain. IEC 61400-12-5:2022. Standard. 2022.
[33]
T. Foken. “Decoupling between the atmosphere and the underlying surface during stable
stratification”. In: Boundary-Layer Meteorology 187.1 (2023), pp. 117–140.
[34]
C. Bak, F. Zahle, R. Bitsche, T. Kim, A. Yde, L. C. Henriksen, M. H. Hansen, J. P. A. A.
Blasques, M. Gaunaa, and A. Natarajan. The DTU 10-MW Reference Wind Turbine.
Danish Wind Power Research 2013 ; Conference date: 27-05-2013 Through 28-05-2013.
2013. url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/the-dtu-10-mw-reference-
wind-turbine (visited on 09/30/2025).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
56
==PAGE:64==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
[35]
T. J. Larsen and A. M. Hansen. How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual (ver. 13.0). 2023.
[36]
G. Ren, J. Liu, J. Wan, F. Li, Y. Guo, and D. Yu. “The analysis of turbulence intensity
based on wind speed data in onshore wind farms”. In: Renewable Energy 123 (2018),
pp. 756–766. issn: 0960-1481. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.02.080.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148118302246.
[37]
A. Scholbrock, P. Fleming, A. Wright, C. Slinger, J. Medley, and M. Harris. “Field Test
Results from Lidar Measured Yaw Control for Improved Yaw Alignment with the NREL
Controls Advanced Research Turbine: Preprint”. English. In: NREL/CP-5000-63202. Nov.
2014. url: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1166673 (visited on 10/05/2025).
[38]
M. J. Churchfield and S. Sirnivas. “On the Effects of Wind Turbine Wake Skew Caused
by Wind Veer”. en. In: 2018 Wind Energy Symposium. Kissimmee, Florida: American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Jan. 2018. isbn: 9781624105227. doi: 10 .
2514/6.2018-0755. url: https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/10.2514/6.2018-0755 (visited
on 10/15/2025).
[39]
J. Jonkman, S. Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott. Definition of a 5-MW Reference
Wind Turbine for Offshore System Development. en. Tech. rep. NREL/TP-500-38060,
947422. Feb. 2009, NREL/TP–500–38060, 947422. doi: 10.2172/947422. url: http:
//www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/947422-nhrlni/ (visited on 10/19/2025).
[40]
E. Gaertner, J. Rinker, L. Sethuraman, F. Zahle, B. Anderson, G. Barter, N. Abbas,
F. Meng, P. Bortolotti, W. Skrzypinski, G. Scott, R. Feil, H. Bredmose, K. Dykes, M.
Shields, C. Allen, and A. Viselli. “IEA Wind TCP Task 37: Definition of the IEA 15-
Megawatt Offshore Reference Wind Turbine”. In: NREL/TP–5000-75698, 1603478 (Mar.
2020), NREL/TP–5000–75698, 1603478. doi: 10.2172/1603478. url: https://www.
osti.gov/servlets/purl/1603478/ (visited on 10/19/2025).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
57
==PAGE:65==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Appendices
A Invalid lidar measurements
Filtering of the lidar measurements was carried out using the built-in signal-to-noise ratio. How-
ever, this method does not eliminate all invalid measurements. Some examples of disturbed wind
profiles are included in Figure A.1.
All of the profiles exhibit a distinct peak in wind speed measurements around 40–50 m. In
addition, one of the wind profiles shows highly unstable measurements above 200 m.
Figure A.1: Three different 10-minute averaged wind profiles from the Beam6X-325 lidar where
invalid measurements have occurred.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
58
==PAGE:66==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
B Turbulence impact quantified
Research question 4 aimed to investigate the effects of veer and shear in comparison to tur-
bulence. From the analysis in Section 4.3.2, it was shown that turbulence has a substantially
greater impact on fatigue loads than both veer and shear combined. However, the magnitude
of this influence was not previously quantified.
To address this, Method A for Sample 3—i.e. wind profiles including both veer and shear—
was also simulated without turbulence as well.
This enables a direct comparison between
simulations with and without turbulence to quantify the exact reduction in fatigue loads.
Table B.1: Key statistical measures based on DELs. Comparing Method A for Sample 3—
explained in Table 3—with and without turbulence.
Note that once turbulence is removed
there is no longer a need for 6 random turbulence seeds and so the combined DEL only consists
of the results from a single simulation per scenario.
Method A: Lidar data
Method A: Lidar data (w/o turbulence)
Baseline
Mean dev. [%]
Underest. [%]
TbFA
-
-77.0
100
TbSS
-
-49.6
100
FlpBRM
-
-47.3
100
EdgBRM
-
-3.4
97.9
YbRoll
-
-66.9
100
YbTilt
-
-65.6
100
ShftTrs
-
-81.1
100
Table B.1 is structured similarly to Table 4, with Method A—specifically including turbu-
lence in this case—used as the baseline, and the other method being compared against it.
Table B.1 clearly shows that for all load channels—except EdgBRM—the fatigue loads are
significantly underestimated when turbulence is removed, even though veer and shear are still
included in the simulations. When comparing the mean deviations, the largest underestimation
from removing both veer and shear was 21.5% for the TbFA load channel. This is notably smaller
than the underestimations observed when turbulence is removed across all load channels—again,
with the exception of EdgBRM.
Furthermore, the table demonstrates that these underestimations are highly consistent, with
100% of the 10-minute DELs calculated from the simulations being underestimated when tur-
bulence is removed—a result not observed when veer and shear were excluded.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
59
==PAGE:67==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
C Additional results from Sample 1
Sample 1 was previously analyzed in Section 3 and further examined in Section 4.3.1.
In the initial analysis in Section 3, a subset of Sample 1 was presented to compare data
sources and investigate the impact of using extrapolated wind profiles on fatigue loads. The
remaining results from Sample 1 are shown in Figure C.2 and Figure C.3.
In Figure 16, Sample 1 was visualized using a heat map to illustrate the limitations of the
sampling strategy applied when generating the first sample. This was shown specifically for
shear, while the corresponding heat map for veer is presented in Figure C.1.
Figure C.1: Heat map displaying the combined 10-minute DELs from Sample 1 described in
Table 3 and generated in Section 3. The grid is made up of wind speed (U) and veer (∆WD)
bins which have step sizes of 1 m/s and 2.5° respectively.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
60
==PAGE:68==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure C.2: For a second subset of Sample 1 described in Table 3 and analyzed in Section 3: the
combined 10-minute DELs (lines) and the 10-minute DELs from the six different seeds (dots)
are shown versus wind speed (rows 1 and 3). For the same simulations, the relative errors of
the combined 10-minute DELs for the three cases—considering Case 3 as the baseline i.e., the
ground truth—are also plotted (rows 2 and 4).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
61
==PAGE:69==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
Figure C.3: For a third subset of Sample 1 described in Table 3 and analyzed in Section 3: the
combined 10-minute DELs (lines) and the 10-minute DELs from the six different seeds (dots)
are shown versus wind speed (rows 1 and 3). For the same simulations, the relative errors of
the combined 10-minute DELs for the three cases—considering Case 3 as the baseline i.e., the
ground truth—are also plotted (rows 2 and 4).
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
62
==PAGE:70==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
D Reference wind turbine rotor comparison
This appendix presents a figure showing the four rotors from the RWT models introduced in
Section 1.2. It also includes the maximum measurement heights from the three data sources
used throughout the thesis.
The RWT models included are the NREL 5 MW [39], DTU 10 MW [34], IEA 15 MW [40],
and IEA 22 MW [31] turbines. The maximum measurement heights correspond to the lidar
data from the ground-based Beam6X-325 lidar—which, as previously mentioned, is capable of
measuring at altitudes higher than those used in this thesis—as well as measurements from
the LMN met mast, both unconstrained and constrained according to the method described in
Section 3.
Additionally, the heights of all cup anemometers installed on the LMN met mast are shown.
The measurement heights used in Section 3 are indicated with higher-opacity crosses.
Figure D.1: Rotor sizes from the RWT models described in Table 2, shown together with the
maximum measurement heights of the data sources used throughout the thesis. Also included
are the heights of all cup anemometers installed on the LMN met mast, indicated with gray
crosses. The higher-opacity crosses denote the measurement heights used in Section 3.
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
63
==PAGE:71==
F. B. Bornemann
MSc Thesis
E Normalized average wind profile
This appendix presents a normalized version of Figure 14. The normalization is achieved by
subtracting the value—either wind speed or wind direction—measured at the lowest altitude
from the entire profile.
As a result, the x-axis no longer represents wind speed (U) and wind direction (WD), but
instead shear (∆U) and veer (∆WD).
(a)
(b)
Figure E.1: Sampled 10-minute averaged lidar-based wind profiles (gray) from wind speeds
near the rated wind speed of the IEA 22 MW RWT (see Table 2 for reference) normalized. The
averaged profile calculated from the samples is shown in blue. Subfigure (a) shows the shear
profiles, and subfigure (b) shows the veer profiles.
Note that the sampled profiles shown in Figure E.1 are not necessarily the same as those
in Figure 14. This happens because the sampled profiles displayed (in gray) includes only 100
randomly selected profiles, whereas the full sample contains considerably more wind profiles.
The average is based on the entire sample not only the sampled wind profiles displayed.
From Figure E.1b, several observations can be made. The variation in veer appears to be
much more sporadic than that observed for shear. Furthermore, the figure clearly shows the
difference in occurrence between scenarios with backing (counterclockwise rotation, indicated
by negative values) and scenarios with veer (clockwise rotation, indicated by positive values),
with the latter occurring significantly more frequently.
Throughout the thesis, no distinction is made between veer and backing. However, it is
observed that the site exhibits a distribution of approximately 72% veer and 28% backing
occurrences, which is consistent with findings reported in the literature investigating this phe-
nomenon [27].
Veer and shear induced loads for large wind turbine rotors
64
