==PAGE:1==
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Esti-
mation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
Master Thesis - Electrical Engineering
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Image: taken from Vestas webpage www.vestas.com/en/energy-solutions/offshore-wind-turbines/V236-15MW on Oct - 2025
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch
System
Master Thesis - Electrical Engineering
November, 2025
By
Daniel Pons Rotger
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Taken
from
Vestas
webpage
www.vestas.com/en/energy-
solutions/offshore-wind-turbines/V236-15MW on Oct - 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Bygning 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Daniel Pons Rotger - s212786
Signature
Date
ii
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This Master Thesis studies the use of residuals to drive adaptation and accommodate
faults in a hydraulic pitch actuator system for wind turbines.
The starting point of the thesis is a model for a hydraulic pitch system delivered in a
form of a Simulink simulator. From that, the model is studied and the detectability and
isolability properties of a set of residuals are discussed. The effect of parameters such as
internal leakage and the effect it has on the residuals is also discussed.
A set of nine different scenarios - one for nominal operation and eight with different faults
occurring - is utilized to evaluate the solution developed in the thesis. The seven scenarios
include faults in the measurements of the pitch angle and pressures, input faults and also
process faults. The isolabitliy properties of the design set of residuals is assessed based on
the described scenarios.
The possibility of isolating faults in the system, specially isolation of faults in the pitch
angle measurement, is used to implement a switched observer-based controller that uses
an observer to reconstruct the faulty measurement. Several alternative observer designs
are explored and assessed.
The provided solution comprises two control schemes: one with the real measurement of
the pitch angle, and one with the estimated value from an Extended Kalman Filter. That
is then combined with the switch controller together with an anti-windup implementation.
It allows for the control action to be switched when a fault in the pitch measurement angle
is isolated, allowing the system to accommodate the fault and continue to track the correct
pitch angle.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Dimitrios Papageorgiou, Associate Professor, DTU
For all the guidance and support during the thesis.
Alessio Dallabona, PhD Student, DTU
For all the help, ideas and encouragement during the thesis.
Julie Kielsgaard, Kæreste,
For alle de lange nætter og tålmodigheden. Elsker dig.
Marcel Solé Àvila, Amic,
Per tot el support, ajuda i cafès.
Andreas, Sigurd and Noam, co-workers and friends at Eupry Aps.
For all the support during this period.
Disclaimer: Me, Daniel Pons Rotger, unique author of this report and thesis, acknowl-
edges the use of the AI Tools ChatGPT and Claude Sonnet for assistance in code devel-
opment and debugging, specially in the generation of plots using Matlab.
iv
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Model of a Wind Turbine Pitch System
6
2.1
Model Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Regions of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Fault Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Scenario Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Theory
16
3.1
Residual and Fault Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Control Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Design of a Switch Controller for Pitch Measurement Fault
24
4.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Model Simplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Model Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Residual Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Observer Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Control Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Results
49
5.1
Evaluation of the Set of Residuals Designed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Evaluation of the Observers Designed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Fault Accommodation Using Residuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion
58
7
Conclusion
61
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
62
A Appendix
A2
A.1 Residuals Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A2
A.2 Residual Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A13
A.3 Source Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A22
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Background
In the later years and due to the need of decarbonisation of the electricity production in
order to move towards a more sustainable world [1], the use of renewable energies has been
increased, and is also expected to continue increasing [2]. Of the different renewable energy
technologies, the use of wind turbines is one of the largest and most extended technologies,
with wind power exhibiting the highest growth rates in recent years as mentioned in [3].
Wind turbines are becoming larger in terms of size and production capabilities, but also
in terms of complexity [4]. Wind turbines, as any large system, are conformed of different
subsystems.
The main subsystems are the rotor hub, the breaking system, the pitch
system on the blades, gearbox, generator, yaw controller, etc. All those subsystems are
subject to faults that can affect the nominal and healthy performance of wind turbines.
Some common examples of faults are: faults in the bearings system, faults in the blade
and its pitching system, gearbox faults and, lastly, faults in the electric generator. The
faults in the pitch system the main causes of the wind turbines downtime [5]. With that,
in order to improve the reliability and eﬀiciency of the wind turbines, there is an increase
in the need to enhance the detectability and prevention of those faults [6].
The basis of the thesis is on the need of detecting, isolating and accommodating faults.
The main goal is to contributed into increasing the availability and reliability of the wind
turbine pitch system, enabling a safer and sustainable energy production solution. The
projects tackles the generation of residuals able to isolate faults, and then trigger a switch
in the control action in order to accommodate the operation of the controller to handle
the fault.
The following section presents a literature review of the state of the art in the relevant
fields.
1.2
Literature Review
This section presents the state of the art in the main areas relevant to the thesis: faults
in wind turbines hydraulic pitch systems; fault detection and isolation; and the use of
residuals to handle fault scenarios.
1.2.1
Wind Turbine Pitch System and Hydraulic Actuation faults
Among the most critical subsystems mentioned, special attention must be paid to the
blade’s pitch system.
The pitch system on the blades is responsible for adjusting the
facing of the blades towards the wind [7]. It becomes a critical component in terms of
tracking a specific speed on the rotor, power output, and more. On top of that, hydraulic
actuated pitch systems are commonly used in wind-turbines, and is where the focus of
the thesis lies The hydraulic system used in the pitch systems of wind turbines, even
being reliable, well known and robust, is still diﬀicult to model due to the large amount of
parameters such as: friction coeﬀicients, viscosity modulus, etc. All that complexity makes
it diﬀicult to locate all the possible faults and assess the critically of them. The work of [8]
presents an accurate description of the hydraulic system of a wind turbine pitch system.
It is stated that the main cause of downtime of wind turbines is due to a failure in the
regulation of the pitch system, that shows the importance and criticality of that subsystem.
Moreover, the work also identifies that there are faults with high impact on the leakages,
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
1
==PAGE:10==
the estimation of the friction force on the cylinder, and also in the measurements and
actuators. Overall, a complex system with many different possible failing points where a
fault could appear and affect the performance and functionality of a wind turbine.
Additionally, due to the complexity described, one of the largest challenges on the wind
turbines hydraulic pitch systems is the difference between the model or nominal plant,
and the actual operating physical pitch system [9, 10]. It is a real concern that some
parameters are unknown, inaccurate, or have a different value from the model to the
real plant. The work presented in [11] states that force and pressure are the most critical
physical magnitudes to track correctly. They have direct correlations with the computation
of flows in the valves and, after all, can directly affect the control action of the end actuator,
i.e. the hydraulic cylinders. Additionally, some common faults on the hydraulic systems
are usually fails in the cylinder that makes it jammed, leakages of oil which affects the
force that the hydraulic systems are able to deliver, several sensor faults and additional
actuator faults [10].
There has been an extensive research in the field of estimating, isolating and accommodat-
ing faults for wind turbines pitch systems as well on the assessment of the health status
of wind turbines. The reveiw presented in [12] shows the most up to date trends and used
systems for faults in wind turbines. Specifically for the blade’s pitch system, there is a
growing use of data-driven approaches. The workb[13] presents a a-priori knowledge-based
ANFIS with the aim to achieve automated detection of significant pitch faults. It success-
fully proves that the approach is able to predict faults in the pitch system up to 21 days
ahead of the fault compromising the operation of the system. Also, on the data-driven
approaches, [5] presents a method using optimized relevance vector machine regression
that can dynamically update detection thresholds to detect anomalies in the operation. In
the publication is also mentioned that the pitch system is complex and includes different
modes of operations, which complicated the model due to the large amount of variables
and parameters that need to be used.
Lastly, on the data-driven approaches, the study [14] describes how the process of usage
of the residuals can be implemented and its complexity. There are three main steps in
the use of residuals to detect faults: design residuals that are sensitive to the faults to
detect and isolate, evaluation and computation of a threshold, and lastly decision making
and alarm triggering based on the generated residuals. All those steps rely on the model
developed being representative on the actual plant, which is one of the largest challenges
when it comes to hydraulic systems [15].
There is also research on the use of observer-based fault diagnosis in the pitch system of
wind turbines. Some examples are the studies presented by [16], [17] and [18]. The first
introduces an approach that is applied to a pitch system as if it was a second order system
and design an observer for the pitch angle in order to adjust the control action based on
the presence of a fault. The later suggest an approach with the use of an Sliding Mode
Observer to detect and isolate faults. They main novelty is that their solution does not
need a prior knowledge of the faults and considers system uncertainty. The use of the
sliding mode observer is to avoid having problems with model uncertainties that could
effect, e.g. a well known Luenberger observer. They are able to design an observer that
is insensitive to parametric variations and presents robustness to disturbances. Must be
noticed that the faults considered in the model are related to the measurements and input,
no process faults are taken into account. Lastly, they also include an estimator treated
as a disturbance to measure the aerodynamic torque measurement. Studies such as [19]
present the use of an observer to estimate the effective bulk modulus of fluid in order to
2
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:11==
detect faults in the hydraulic systems. Lastly, the study [20] presents a fault estimator
based on an adaptive observer.
In regard to the fault accommodation or handling faults the pitch system for wind turbines,
there has also been a lot of work in the design of robust and fault tolerant controllers.
The study [11], even it being relatively old, it already included the faults in the design
of a controller so it could behave as a robust and fault tolerant control. The approach
suggested the use of a Lyapunov-based force control approach for a hydraulic servo system,
and compensate for friction modelling and pressure tracking. The results obtained proved
that the suggested methodology provides the desired performance of the system.
Some examples of the use of sliding mode control for wind turbines pitch systems under
faulty conditions are: [21] presents a generalized version of the sliding mode method that
takes into account disturbance and multiple faults. The study shows that the desired
performance when actuator fault, sensor fault and uncertain disturbances are present in
the considered non-linear pitch system.
[22] consider only one actuator fault in their
adaptive sliding mode.
Lastly, [23] implement an integral sliding mode controller and an observer to obtain the
states. Two faulty and one healthy modes of operation are defined, and the faults consid-
ered are on the pitch state estimation and on the actuator. They approach is validated
with numerical simulations.
The work presented in [24] shows an implementation of a control algorithm with a memory
effect. The memory effect is implemented by the use of an integral adjustment to the
accumulator growth rate. Moreover, the Individual Pitch Control (IPC) is fed also with
a lower bound for the pitch angular speed. That lower bound is implemented to be able
to act as a filter and is adjusted depending on the operation range. The outcome of the
study suggested that the faults on friction, leakage in the piston, rod and pump can be
handled by the controller with the exception of the accumulator pre-charge fault, which
cannot be addressed by minimizing the use of available hydraulic power.
1.2.2
Fault Diagnosis in Hydraulic System
This section opens the scope to different approaches implemented in a different fields
of research other than wind turbines. Some studies and methods have been applied to
mechanical systems of aerial vehicles that can be relevant to the hydraulics in a wind
turbine pitch systems.
As presented, there is a large amount of research in wind turbine pitch systems to either
detect faults, and also to design robust controller. The study [25] presents an approach
that involves the generation of residuals, use them for fault estimation, and then feed them
into a controller in order to be able to compensate for possible faults. The approach is
applied to Hypersonic Vehicles.
According to this approach, a residual from the Fault detector block in injected into the
Adaptive sliding mode estimation/FTC. On the study is described how the residual has
information on the estimation of the fault in the pitch angle. That is taken into account
when designing sliding mode, and the derivative of the estimate of the fault appears on the
derivative of the sliding mode surface. That allows the controller to compensate for the
dynamics on the fault. The fault of the system in the form κ = ||fT
θ a ˙˜fθ||. The approach of
adding directly the fault estimation in the controller removes the need of having to detect
and isolate a fault to be able to switch to a different controller or different parameters.
On the use of residuals with robust controllers in turbofan engines, [26] studied how to
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
3
==PAGE:12==
keep track of faults even when a robust controller is used. It is common for a residual
to not be able to detect a fault due to the fact that a robust controller is in place and
capable of counteracting the fault. The study presents a system transformation in order to
monitor both the control inputs and the system outputs to guarantee strong detectability
of the faults even when the plant is able to maintain the performance required.
The work presented in [27] introduces a novel approach on the way to process and extract
information of residuals. The method suggests the extraction of features from the resid-
ual signals. It also deals with the fact the residuals contains information on the noise,
non-modelled uncertainties and disturbances. Moreover, the analysis on the residuals is
performed and the threshold for detecting anomalies is set depending on the average and
standard deviation of the features extracted from the residuals.
On the study [28] with application in satellite systems, it is suggested to use a residual
between the expected value of the controlled input and the actual value to the model
known input-output relation in order to estimate a fault in the input. Must be noticed
that the scope of the study only covers that fault on the input.
It can be seen how in studies in mechanical systems such as [25] and [28] the estimation of
the fault has been used to feed into the controller of the systems in order to be compensate
for possible faults.
The approaches suggested in the literature for wind turbine pitch
systems do implement residuals to detect and isolate faults, and also estimating faults to
design a controller such as seen in [21]. For a large and complex system such as the one
presented in [8] an approach of generating residuals to estimate faults and compensate
for them in the controllers has not been found at the time of writing this thesis. For
that reason, the focus of the thesis will be on that area. The following section defines the
project scope.
1.3
Project Scope
With the state of the art presented, the scope of the project is focused on contributing
to making energy production using wind turbines more reliable and safer. The aim is to
reduce the down time of wind turbines via the diagnosis and accommodation of faults in
the hydraulic pitch system. The thesis is focused on the exploration of the use of residuals
to address the fault diagnosis and accommodation. The activities developed during the
thesis aim to fulfil the following objectives.
• Perform a literature review for a wind turbine hydraulic pitch system in the topics
of fault-tolerant control using residuals.
• Definition of a set of residuals that allow the detection and isolation of faults
• Definition of scenarios with different faults to test the different sets of residuals and
the detection and isolation capabilities.
• Use of a baseline control strategy for comparing the behaviour and response of the
system.
• Investigate the control and estimation-oriented residuals.
• Explore the use of the residuals for, e.g.
parameter estimation or adapting the
control action for fault accommodation.
• Perform simulations to test the solution developed and implemented.
• Assess the results obtained with the relevant metrics to evaluate the solutions im-
plemented.
4
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:13==
• Document the results in a scientific report.
The thesis project uses data generated from a high fidelity simulator.
All the imple-
mentation, tests and results obtained are obtained in simulation. Moreover, the solution
provided by the work presented in the thesis tackles the accomodation of a falt in the
pitch angle measurement.
1.3.1
Report Structure
This report is structured following the organizational structure: Introduction, Methods,
Results and Discussion (IMRaD) [29]. That structure offers a clear overview of the different
steps that will guide the reader and ease the understanding of the report’s content. The
report’s structure is:
• Introduction. Introduce the topic of the thesis, a literature review on the field and
the problem statement that will be addressed in the thesis.
• Model of a Wind Turbine Pitch System. Chapter where the model of starting
point of the thesis is presented and described, ans some insights on the model are
provided.
• Theory.
Will present the main concepts that are used for the development of
the thesis.
The main points that are described are structural analysis, residual
for fault detection, Generalized Likelihood Ratio (GLR), Sliding Mode Control,
adaptation, etc.
• Design of a Switch Controller for Pitch Angle Measurement Fault. Chapter
where the different methods are applied in order to design a switch controller for a
pitch angle measurement fault.
• Results. Presentation of the results obtained with the approached implemented in
the previous chapter.
• Discussion. Discussion, explanation and interpretation of the results obtained.
• Conclusion. Final notes and conclusions on the work developed during the thesis.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Model of a Wind Turbine Pitch
System
This following section presents the model of the hydraulic pitch system used in the project.
The model has been formulated between the inspection of a high-fidelity model simulator
implemented in Simulink and guidelines from the study presented [8]. First, a simplified
block diagram of the entire system is presented:
Figure 2.1: Block diagram of the different subsystem in the Hydraulic Pitch System
Figure 2.1 presents the subsystems that compose the different parts of the hydraulic pitch
system covered in the project.
The Valve System is actuated by three different pressures, and it has a control input
that is passed through a second order system that sets the position of the valve. The
three pressures used are: pp pressure in the cylinder on the piston side; pr pressure in the
cylinder on the rod side; ps as the supply pressure to the whole system in the accumulator.
The position of the valve combines with the pressure on the cylinder will determine the
hydraulic flow of the oil that will determine the position of that system. A detailed image
of the system is presented in Figure 2.2.
Mfric
ΘA
Fext
Ffric
Mext
Figure 2.2: Sketch of the Mechanical and Hydraulic System - (added red arrows to the
sketch presented in the work: [30])
The Pumping Mechanism is affected by the flows coming out of the valves and the
6
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:15==
value on the supply pressure, which can fluctuate. The Cylinder is connected to the valve
system and its position depends on the pressures and flow of the hydraulic liquid that flows
through the valve and from chamber to chamber of the cylinder. Lastly, the angle of the
blade will directly depend on the cylinder’s position and its mechanical relations.
2.1
Model Definition
This subsection presents the mathematical formulation of the model. The model has the
following states:
• pp and its derivative
d
dt = ˙pp as the pressure and rate of change in the piston side
chamber in the hydraulic cylinder.
• pr and its derivative
d
dt = ˙pr as the pressure and rate of change in the rod side
chamber in the hydraulic cylinder.
• ps and its derivative
d
dt = ˙ps as the supply pressure and rate of change for the
hydraulic system.
• β and its derivative
d
dt = ˙β as the pitch angle and rate of change (velocity) of the
blade.
• ˙β and its derivative d
dt = ¨β as pitch velocity and rate of change (acceleration).
• xCyl and its derivative d
dt = ˙xCyl as the position of the cylinder.
With that, the mathematical model describing how the states relate to each other, the
following equations are presented. Must be noticed that the model is presented without
any faults, just the dynamics describing the nominal operation of the system.
˙pp = (Qp →Ap ˙xcyl →Qi) · βeffp
Apxcyl + Vp0
(2.1)
˙pr = (Ar ˙xcyl →Qr + Qi) · βeffr
Ar(CylStroke →xcyl) + Vr0
(2.2)
˙ps = qAcc ·
)
1
VOil/βeffs +
1
κad · Vgas
ps
"
(2.3)
The Equations 2.1 and 2.3 present the dynamics of the pressures. It can be seen that
those pressures are dependant on the flow both into the piston side chamber Qp and the
rod side chamber Qr. Those are computed as:
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
7
==PAGE:16==
Qp = Kv(xv)
#
|ps →pp| · sign(ps →pp) · H(xv)
→Kv(xv)
#
|pt →pp| · sign(pt →pp) · H(→xv)
(2.4)
Qrv = 0 · H(xv) + φvalve(→Kv(xv))
$
|pr →ps| · sign(pr →ps) · H(→xv)
(2.5)
Qv = Qp · H(xv) →Qrv · H(→xv)
(2.6)
Qcv = (pr →ps →pcv) · Kvc · H(pr →ps →pcv)
(2.7)
Qr = Qrv + Qcv
(2.8)
VOil = Vhose + Vacc →Vgas
(2.9)
qAcc = Qs + Qcv →Qv →Qrel
(2.10)
Vgas = Vacc
%Pgas0
ps
&1/κad
· H(ps →Pgas0) + Vacc · H(Pgas0 →ps)
(2.11)
Qrel = Kvp(ps →Ppnom) · H(ps →Ppnom)
(2.12)
Qi = Cli · (pp →pr)
(2.13)
Qp is the flow into the chamber of the piston, Qrv is the flow on the release valve, Qcv is
the flow into the check valve, and Qr is the flow into the rod chamber of the piston. The
term Qi is the internal leakage between the chamber of the piston and the chamber of the
rod.
The function H(x) denotes the Heaviside function. Its behaviour is the following:
H(x) =
'
0,
if x < 0
1,
if x ≥0
(2.14)
A graphical representation of the function is presented in Figure 2.3a.
The function Kv(xv) is the gain entering the dynamics of the pressure, as a function of
the position of the valve xv. Its values are obtained experimentally and implemented as
a lookup-table. The function is presented in Figure 2.3b The acceleration of the pitching
(a) Heaviside function H(x)
(b) Lookup-table Kv(xv)
Figure 2.3: Functions used in the model
angle ¨β is directly correlated with sum of momentums affecting the pitching blade: MCyl,
8
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:17==
MExt and Mfric.
¨β =
1
Jtot
· (MCyl →MExt →Mfric)
(2.15)
(2.16)
The relations describing the different momentums are presented bellow.
MCyl = (FCyl →Ffric) · LBE · sin(ΘA)
(2.17)
Mfric = tanh(Ktan · ˙β) · τcp · H( ˙β) + tanh(Ktan · ˙β) · τcn · H(→˙β) + Bv · ˙β
(2.18)
FCyl = pp · Ap →pr · Ar
(2.19)
ΘA = arccos
%L2
BE + (LAB + xcyl)2 →L2
AE
2LBE(LAB + xcyl)
&
(2.20)
xcyl =
#
→cos(β + Φoffset) · 2 · LBE · LAE + L2
BE + L2
AE →LAB
(2.21)
Ffric = tanh(Ctanh · ˙xcyl) · Fcoup + Bvis · ˙xcyl
(2.22)
Must be noticed that the variable Mext on the equation to compute the momentum of the
pitch system MPitch is unknown.
Finally, the following relations are used in order to compute the position of the cylinder
knowing the pitch angle. This computation is possible due to the fact that the geometry
of the system is known. It is presented in the following expressions:
˙xcyl = dxcyl
dβ
· ˙β
(2.23)
dxcyl
dβ
=
LBE · LAE · sin(β + Φoffset)
#
→cos(β + Φoffset) · 2 · LBE · LAE + L2
BE + L2
AE
(2.24)
Lastly, the known variable of the system are the following:
xv = u
ps = y1
pp = y2
pr = y3
β = y4
(2.25)
(2.26)
2.2
Regions of Operation
On the model presented in section 2.1, there are some equations that include the heaviside
function H(x). That function behave as discontinuity when the argument x goes from
negative to positive, and the other way around. The main equations and terms affect that
those discontinuities are presented in the expression bellow:
Qp = Kv(xv)
#
|ps →pp| · sign(ps →pp) · H(xv)
→Kv(xv)
#
|pt →pp| · sign(pt →pp) · H(→xv)
(2.27)
Qrv = 0 · H(xv) + φvalve · (→Kv(xv))
$
|pr →ps| · sign(pr →ps) · H(→xv)
(2.28)
Qv = Qp · H(xv) →Qrv · H(→xv)
(2.29)
Qcv = (pr →ps →pcv) · Kvc · H(pr →ps →pcv)
(2.30)
(2.31)
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
9
==PAGE:18==
The red terms are the ones that depend on H(x). The effect that the Heaviside function
could have on the equations where it is present is that the terms multiplying that Heaviside
function become irrelevant to the equation when H(x) = 0. That implies that, for example
in Equation 2.27, when the position of the valve xv is negative, the first term on the
equation becomes zero. That implies that the flow Qp no longer is a function of ps, pp and
Kv(xv), but only pp and Kv(xv) (pt is a constant). With that, if when generating residuals
that equation is used as an Analytical Redundancy Relation (ARR), the it would not
always be sensitive to faults on ps, which could lead to a bad interpretation of a residual.
This will be tackled with greater detail in chapter 4.
For that reason, the system is divided into different operating regions defined as:
{














Case 1:
xv > 0,
pr →ps →pcv > 0,
Case 2:
xv > 0,
pr →ps →pcv < 0,
Case 3:
xv < 0,
pr →ps →pcv > 0,
Case 4:
xv < 0,
pr →ps →pcv < 0.
(2.32)
With that, the Equations 2.27 - 2.30 are also defined in the different operational regions.
Case 1: xv > 0, pr →ps →pcv > 0
Qp = Kv(xv)
#
|ps →pp| sign(ps →pp),
Qrv = 0,
Qv = Qp,
Qcv = (pr →ps →pcv)Kvc.
Case 2: xv > 0, pr →ps →pcv < 0
Qp = Kv(xv)
#
|ps →pp| sign(ps →pp),
Qrv = 0,
Qv = Qp,
Qcv = 0.
Case 3: xv < 0, pr →ps →pcv > 0
Qp = →Kv(xv)
#
|pt →pp| sign(pt →pp),
Qrv = φvalve(→Kv(xv))
$
|pr →ps| sign(pr →ps),
Qv = →Qrv,
Qcv = (pr →ps →pcv)Kvc.
Case 4: xv < 0, pr →ps →pcv < 0
Qp = →Kv(xv)
#
|pt →pp| sign(pt →pp),
Qrv = φvalve(→Kv(xv))
$
|pr →ps| sign(pr →ps),
Qv = →Qrv,
Qcv = 0.
10
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.4 presents a scenario of the system in healthy operation and the operational
region that is active on every point in time.
Figure 2.4: Operational Regions
It can be seen that on the first part of the simulation, until around 1 s, the reference to
track is fairly steady. The operational regions dominating are cases 2 and 4. That implies
that the valve is being correct and goes through positive and negative values. Around the
seconds 100s, 110s, 160s and 180s from the simulation presented in Figure 2.4, a large and
fast change in the pitch angle is executed. The system operates in Case 1 when trying to
increase the pitch angle, that is due to the fact that the pressure pr increases to retract
the piston and achieve the desired tracking of the angle β.
As a final remark regarding the operational regions, Table 2.4 presents the amount of time
on the simulation provided belongs to each of the operational cases described.
Case
Time Active [%]
1
11.34
2
40.45
3
1.33
4
46.88
Table 2.1: Percentage of time spent in each operational region
The total amount of ”switches” in between the modes for the presented scenario is 9755.
Must be noticed that the distribution of operation time on each operational region, as
well as the amount of switches in the modes of operation, is dependent on the working
conditions and working operation of the pitch system. It is also expected that due to faults,
the operational regions change, and even are ”masked” behind possible sensor faults.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Fault Definition
As mentioned in the Introduction, the main faults that affect the pitch systems are sensor
faults and process faults. Sensor faults involve a sensor reporting a faulty value of the
physical magnitude being measured. The faulty operation of the sensor readings could
involve completely loosing the readings of a sensor, or also obtaining wrong readings such
as bias in the measurements, augmented noise, de-calibration of the sensors, etc. The
process faults on the other hand can vary greatly. From faults in friction coeﬀicients,
leakages and clogged filters in the hydraulic control system, to increased friction due to
temperature changes, etc. Both natures of faults, measurement and process faults, can
affect the nominal operation of the plant, leading to lose in performance tracking, or
leading to critical faults that could physically damage the wind turbine.
In order to tackle the different faults, the following possible faults are presented:
• fpp as a process fault in the dynamics of ˙pp. This could include faults in the leakages,
parameter faults, etc.
• fpr as a process fault in the dynamics of ˙pr. This could include faults in the leakages,
parameter faults, etc.
• fmom as a process fault in the dynamics of ¨β.
This could include faults in the
estimation of the friction in the cylinder, external force, etc.
• fu as an input actuator faults.
• fmps as a measurement fault for the sensor reading ps.
• fmpp as a measurement fault for the sensor reading pp.
• fmpr as a measurement fault for the sensor reading pr.
• fmβ as a measurement fault for the sensor reading β.
With those faults, the affected equations are:
˙pp = (Qp →Ap ˙xcyl)βeffp
Apxcyl + Vp0
+ fpp
(2.33)
˙pr =
(Ar ˙xcyl →Qr)βeffr
Ar(CylStroke →xcyl) + Vr0
+ fpr
(2.34)
¨β =
1
Jtot
(MCyl →MExt →Mfric) + fmom
(2.35)
xv = u + fu
(2.36)
ps = y1 + fmps
(2.37)
pp = y2 + fmpp
(2.38)
pr = y3 + fmpr
(2.39)
β = y4 + fmβ
(2.40)
The remaining equations presented in the previous sections continue to hold.
12
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Scenario Definition
In order to test the methods implemented, a set of scenarios are implemented in simulation.
Each scenario presents a different fault. Process, sensor and input faults are considered.
A total of nine different scenarios are defined.
Scenario 1: Healthy scenario. In this scenario all the components of the system do behave
under nominal conditions. The system tracks the reference for the pitch angle.
Scenario 2: β sensor fault (precision). In this scenario the fault injected at tfault affects
the readings by adding additional noise on top of the measurements. The noise is added
as a random Gaussian process with zero mean and standard deviation of 1000rad2.
Scenario 3: β sensor fault (bias). In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a constant
bias on the sensor. The bias is of the magnitude 0.12 rad, and is added in the positive
direction, meaning that all readings will be offset 0.12 rad up from the actual position of
the pitch.
Scenario 4: pp sensor fault. In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a constant gain
in the sensor measuring the pressure pp. The gain injected is 100.
Scenario 5: pr sensor fault. In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a gain in the
sensor measuring the pressure pr. The gain injected is 10.
Scenario 6: ps sensor fault. In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a constant bias
in the sensor measuring the pressure ps. The bias injected has a magnitude of 2 · 107 Pa
in the positive direction.
Scenario 7: Qp fault. In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a bias on the flow
in the piston chamber. The value injected is a constant bias of value 9 · 10−4m3/s in
the positive direction. The fault would represent a process fault where the piston would
operate differently that what it would be expected from the model presented when applying
a specific input.
Scenario 8: Qr fault. In this scenario the fault injected at tfault is a bias on the flow
in the rod side of the piston chamber. Similar to the one described above, the bias has a
value of 9 · 10−4m3/s in the positive direction. It would also represent a process fault.
Scenario 9: Input fault.
In this scenario, the actuator for the valve controlling the
cylinder has a bias of value 2.
For all the scenario presented, tfault = 60 s. Notice that the types of faults introduced
have different natures. There is faults in the form of constant offsets, gains and precision
on the sensors in order to be able to tackle different types of responses and reactions of
faults and residuals.
In order to illustrate the scenarios and differences between them, the different measured
values are presented for the nine different scenarios:
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5: Known variables (Measurements) obtained with the different faulty scenarios
implemented
From Figure 2.5 it can be seen that the measurements that differ the most from before
and after the fault time of 60 seconds are the pressure pp and pr, with the exception of
Scenario 6, when the fault is only on the ps sensor. For the pitch angle β measurement,
it can be see that on all the faults, the system is able to track back the β measurement so
it follows the reference. Notice that implies that on the scenarios where the measurement
of β is faulty, the pitching angle will try to control the faulty measurement, which will
imply that the real pitch angle is not correct. For that reason, the main fault that requires
adaptation or robust control is the pitch angle measurement. That will be further discussed
in subsequent sections.
Additionally, it must be noticed that the system there is a larger effect on the pressures
pp and pr due to the fact that those are the leading the movement of the pitch. Hence, if
there is a fault in the system and it stops working under nominal conditions, a different
control action will be applied. That effect can also be seen in the controlled input u. It is
presented in the following figure:
14
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.6: Control input u of the system
Figure 2.6 shows that how the different faults affect differently to the control action is
required for the system to track the reference.
2.4.1
High Fidelity Simulator
For the development of the project, a high fidelity simulator implemented in Simulink is
used.
The simulation uses the numerical solver ode4 (Runge-Kutta) with a fixed time step of
Ts = 0.001s.
The Matlab version used is Matlab R2025a, and the Simulink version 25.1.
The model implements all the relations presented above in different Matlab function block.
The faults are simulated with the use of step block and gain block to enable and inject the
faults. From that, the variables are log to the workspace after every run, and then saved
to a .mat file to be loaded online and help on the iterations for the desing procedure.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Theory
This chapter presents the relevant theoretical concepts and background for the different
methods applied in this project. The chapter is divided in two different sections. The
first one where the focus is on the residual generation and utilisation. The second sections
targets the control part of the problem.
3.1
Residual and Fault Detection
When a system stops operating under nominal conditions and changes to faulty operational
mode due to a part or component presenting a non-nominal behaviour, that system is
operating under faulty conditions. The faults generating that change in the operation can
be either process faults, where a parameter deviates from its nominal value due to physical
changes, properties of a physical change due to some mechanical stress that modifies, e.g.,
some physical relations such as a leakages, or a sensor fault.
The sensor faults affect
the readings of the sensors places in the physical sensor that can, for example, be used
to perform the control action in the system.
A example of a sensor fault that could
compromise the operation of a physical system i fault on the sensor of the output that is
being controlled and fed directly into the controller. That would cause that the controller
will track a wrong value, which would turn out to a difference between the real value
and the reference to tack, even though according to the sensor readings, the system is
operating correctly.
As per the system presented in the previous section, it contains both process and mea-
surement faults. If any of the faults is present, the system would behave, in a larger or
smaller amount, different to the nominal conditions. For that reason, there is a need to
be able to detect and isolate faults. For the scope of the project, the faults are to be
detected an isolated using residuals. Residuals are signals computed on equations derived
straight from a model. In order to define residuals, the concept of structurally diagnosable
or monitorable model is needed, as presented in [31]. The concept ensures that is able
to test if the constraints describing the system are satisfied or not. When a fault occurs,
then some equations would stop holding. That principle is used then to be able detect
if a fault is happening or not. The relations allowing the verification of the operation in
nominal conditions are called Analytical Redundant Relations (ARR).
With those ARRs, the residuals can be derived as the propagation of known variables.
Residuals depend on known variables.
A residual r(t) can be computed from causal
operations in real time by inserting known variables such as inputs and measurements.
Fault diagnosis based on the ARRs identifies faults by comparing the behaviour of the
system over time with the expected behaviour described by the model constraints.
Some important concepts related to the Fault Diagnosis based on ARR are: Robust ARRs,
which are ”insensitive to unknown inputs and unknown parameters. This insures that they
are satisfied when no fault is present, so that false alarms are not issued.”; Sensitive to
faults ARRs, ”insures that they are not satisfied when a constraint is violated, i.e. a fault is
present, so that faults are detected”; and Structured where it ”insures that in the presence
of a given fault, only a subset of the ARRs is not satisfied, thus allowing to recognise the
fault that occurred from the subset of ARRs that are satisfied and the subset that is not
satisfied.”[31].
16
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:25==
With that, the sensitivity of the ARRs defining residuals can be used to detect the presence
of faults and isolate faults. The ARRs can be obtained from a structural Analysis. This
concept is presented in the following subsections.
3.1.1
Structural Analysis
The ARRs are obtained from an over constrained part of a model describing a physical
system.
That over-constrained part of the system is where multiple equations can be
match in order to obtain a relation that equates to a residual equal to zero when the
system is operating under nominal conditions. When a fault occurs, and the equations
used to obtain that relation are sensitive to the present fault, it is reflected on a residual
becoming different to zero.
The analysis of what equations can be used to obtain those relation that equate to zero can
be obtained from a structural analysis. An structural analysis describes ”by quantitative
or qualitative relations, by equations, by rules or by tabular relations” [31] the relations of
the system. Those relations are then use to describe the nominal conditions of the system.
With that approach, that approach can be used to determine if a deviation from nominal
operation has happened.
The structural analysis of a model can be performed by representing the relations and
constraints in a graph and analysing the relations within all the nodes. From the graph, a
incidence matrix can be used to describe the same relations. An example of an incidence
matrix is presented in Table 3.1
Known Variables
Unknown Variables
zi
xj
c1
-
-
...
-
-
ck
-
-
Table 3.1: Example of Incidence matrix with constraints ck and variables zi and xi.
The incidence matrix presents the relations between constraints and variables so that it
can be seen what variables are present in each equations. If a variable is present in an
equations then a 1 is placed in the matrix. For differential constraints, or constraints
where the equations cannot be inverted to compute that variable, then an X is placed.
Once the incidence matrix is filled with all the relations of the studied system, the concept
of matching is used. The concept consists on assigning equations with known terms in
order to isolate another variable. Once a variable can be matched in multiple ways, it
can be determined from different paths and equations, it is a redundant relation.
If
that happens, then the relations used for the computation can be used to detect faults.
A formal definition of a matching is provided in [31] as ”Definition 5.3 (Matching) A
matching M ⊆ϵ is a set of disjoint edges of a bipartite graph G”. Multiple matchings can
be obtained from the same model.
Lastly, the reachability of variable a to b indicates that from a variable a, it is possible to
compute variable b with an alternate path of constraints and variables described in the
bipartite graph describing the system, which is the same as the relations presented in the
incidence matrix.
The graphs describing the system can be of three different types depending on the con-
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
17
==PAGE:26==
straints and relations between the variables. Over-constrained, just-constrained and under-
constrained sub-graphs are usually used.
In regard to the algorithms to compute the matchings mentioned above, and hence the
relations use to compute residuals, the ranking algorithm is an easy to implement approach.
It consists on starting from the knowledge of a known variable, and spread that knowledge
over the equations until an equation with all terms is obtained. That equation is then
used as a residual that needs to hold to zero when the system operates under nominal
conditions.
The concept of spreading the ”knowledge” of a variable, and spreading it to compute vari-
ables until a relation matched to zero is found, can become complicated when the system
gets larger. For that reason, there are several tools used to compute and obtain infor-
mation about the reachability of the variables and faults of a model, the fault isolability
properties, and even obtain the overdetermined parts of the system to compute the re-
dundant relations. The work presented by [32] provides a toolbox that allows to compute
and obtain all that information from large and complex models.
3.1.2
Minimal Structurally Overdetermined set of equations
A concept that is used for the analysis of dynamical systems (such as the model presented
in the previous sections) is the Minimal Structurally Overdetermined set of equations, also
refered as MSO. According to [33]: ”An SO set is a minimal structurally overdetermined
(MSO) set if no proper subset is an SO set.”. That implies that the redundancy of a
set of equations is lost if an equation is removed.
That is useful in the generation of
residuals because if an MSO is found as a subset of equations describing the model, then
a redundant relation can be found to be used as the residual generate.
With that, the MSO sets of equations can be computed with the approach suggested by
[33]. The study suggested a ”top-down approach” where the starting point is the whole
model, and then the model is reduced equation by equation until an MSO set of equations
is found. Then, when an MSO is found, the redundant equation can be used as a residual
that needs to fulfil the equations when the system is operating under nominal / non faulty
conditions.
3.1.3
Generalized Likelihood Ratio
Once a residual signal is obtained, it is necessary to be able to processes it in some way to
be able to set a threshold and detect if a fault has happened. The detection of the fault
will depend on the evaluation of the residual. Ideally, the value of a residual when the
system is under nominal conditions would be zero, and when there is fault and a residual
reacts to it, the value changes to be different from zero. Due to the non-ideal real plant,
where there is noise in the measurements that gets propagated though the computations,
and is there when the Generalized Likelihood Ratio (GLR) comes into play.
The GLR is the statistical tool that can be used to compare the distribution that a residual
under healthy conditions would follow, and a different one. It it used to measure how likely
is the distribution that the residuals follows to belong to the healthy distribution, with a
known mean and standard deviation, and the distribution when a fault is present.
If is a residual is defined as:
18
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:27==
from model equations:
(3.1)
x1 = z1
(3.2)
f(x) = θ
(3.3)
Residual defined as:
(3.4)
x1 = g(z, θ) where z1 ̸∈z
(3.5)
r = z1 →x1
(3.6)
The residual will take the value of the fault affecting the sensor z1. Then, the residual will
be, under nominal conditions, a Gaussian distribution with mean µ0 = 0 and standard
deviation σ (assuming that the noise entering the system follows a Gaussion distribution)
affect on how is the noise affecting the system. On the other hand, with a bias on the
sensor happens, then the mean value will change to an unknown µ1.
With that, the
problem can be formulated as distinguishing between if the residual is behaving under the
hypothesis r ∼H0 : N(µ0, σ), which is nominal operation, or a faulty state r ∼H1. To
compute that, it is presented in [31]: ”Log-likelihood between hypotheses H0 and H1, with
an hypothetical change time j, can be computed as:”
Sk
j (θ1) =
k
,
i=j
ln pθ1(z(i))
pθ0(z(i))
(3.7)
Where pθ denotes the density function of the distributions under H0 and H1. Since the
values for H1 are unknown, the maximum likelihood estimates as:
(ˆk, ˆθ1) = arg
%
max
1≤j≤k max
θ1 Sk
j (θ1)
&
(3.8)
Where then the GLR decision function is presented as:
g(k) = max
1≤j≤k max
θ1 Sk
j (θ1)
(3.9)
Which can then be compared with a threshold in order to detect if the system is under
H0 (nominal plant), or H1, where a fault is present.
In order to not take the time since the start, i.e. k = 1, then a moving window of M
samples is introduced. With that, the decision function g(k) depends on the samples in
the window. That will also include a delay for the detection, which will be of time M · Ts
minimum, where Ts is the sampling time. The expression for the test statistical becomes
then:
g(k) =
max
k−M≤j≤k max
θ1 Sk
j (θ1)
(3.10)
In the case of an unknown change in mean, the test statistical can be computed as:
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
19
==PAGE:28==
g(k) =
1
2 · σ2
max
k−M−1≤j≤k


k
,
i=j
(r(i) →µ0)


2
(3.11)
Where then the following decision law can be used:
H0 when g(k) ≤h
(3.12)
H1 when g(k) > h
(3.13)
With that, the GLR approach for detection the presence of fault in a residual is lead to the
computation of the defined test statistical, and the tuning of the parameters M (window
size) and h (threshold). The selection of the thresholds can be based on the computation
of the probability of faults, faults alarms and probability of detection, and also based on
experimental data. That requires the knowledge of the probability function followed by
the residuals. In the chapter 7.2 Change Detection Algorithms from [31] several options
are discussed.
In chapter 4 the numerical implementation used in the report is presented.
3.2
Control Strategy
This section presents the main theory and concepts related to the control strategy. The
focus of the control strategy is to provide a solution that is feasible to implement in
real wind turbines. There is two main subsections: the first one targeting the design of
observers, and the second one focused on the controller itself.
3.2.1
Observers
In regard to the observers, there are multiple approaches to estimate parameters and states
from a system available measurements and a mathematical representation of that same
system.
Lueremberg Observer
A rather widely used observer is the Lueremberg Observer.
The principal idea of the
observer is to reconstruct the states of a system based on the model, inputs and output
signals. On top of that, an innovation/correction signal is computed from the difference
between the measured and the estimated outputs (the available ones). That allows the
system to drive the estimation towards zero [34, 35]
Given a dynamical system in the form:
˙x(t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
(3.14)
y(t) = Cx(t)
(3.15)
The Lueremberg Observer can be formulated as:
˙ˆx(t) = Aˆx(t) + Bu(t) + L

y(t) →ˆy(t)

(3.16)
ˆy(t) = Cˆx(t)
(3.17)
Where the A, B and C matrixes are the matrixes describing the system, i.e. the model of
the system. The matrix L is the observer gain matrix. The system, needs to be detectable,
and the matrix L needs to be chosen so that A →L · C is Hurwitz, i.e. that all eigenvalues
have negative real part.
20
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:29==
The estimation error of the Lueremberg Observer is:
e(t) = x(t) →ˆx(t) = (A →L · C) · e(t)
(3.18)
And given that the all the eigenvalues of A →L · C have a negative real part, the error will
converge to 0.
Kalman Filter and Extended Kalman Filter
A Kalman Filter is an optimal observer which minimizes the estimation error covariance.
The algorithm uses measurements of a system to produce estimates over time of unknown
variables. The Kalman Filter does estimation of joint probability distributions at each
prediction step. [36].
In a linear system defined as:
˙x(t) = A(t) · x(t) + B(t) · u(t) + Bv(t) · v1(t)
(3.19)
y(t) = C(t) · x(t) + v2(t)
(3.20)
For a Kalman Filter to exist, ”it is necessary that the system be completely observable (or
reconstructable). Alternatively the unobservable portion of the system has to be stable.”,
as mentioned in [36].
The terms v1 and v2 are the process and observation noise respectively, and have a mean
value of zero. An observer can be defined as:
˙ˆx(t) = M(t) · ˆx(t) + N(t) · u(t) + L(t) · y(t)
(3.21)
The estimation error and estimation error dynamics can be presented as:
˙e(t) = [A(t) →L(t) · C(t)] · x(t) →M(t) · ˆx(t) + Bv(t) · v1(t) →L(t) · v2(t)
(3.22)
Knowing that the noise source v1 and v2 are zero, then the mean value of both sides can
be computed, and it can be found as:
M(t) = A(t) →L(t) · C(t)
(3.23)
So the observer acquires the form:
˙ˆx = A(t) · ˆx(t) + B(t) · u(t) + L(t) · (y(t) →C(t) · ˆx(t))
(3.24)
With that, it can be obtained that the dynamics of the variance of the reconstruction error
can be defined as:
˙Q(t) = [A(t) →L(t) · C(t)] · Q(t) + Q(t) · [A(t) →L(t) · C(t)]T
(3.25)
+Bv(t) · V1(t) · BT
v (t) + L(t) · V2(t) · LT (t).
With that, the solution to the LQR problem is applied and the following expression is
found:
L(t) = Q(t) · CT (t) · V −1
2
(t)
(3.26)
Where L(t) is the Kalman gain. The whole derivation can be found in Chapters 6 and 7
from [36].
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
21
==PAGE:30==
From that, the steps of the Kalman Filter in its discrete form are presented in the Algo-
rithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Discrete Kalman Filter
1: 1) State Estimate update:
ˆx(k)−= F(k →1)ˆx(k →1)+ + G(k →1)u(k →1)
2: 2) Covariance update:
Q(k)−= F(k →1)Q(k →1)+F T (k →1) + G(k →1)V1(k →1)GT (k →1)
3: 3) Kalman Gain:
L(k) = Q(k)−CT (k)

C(k)Q(k)−CT (k) + V2
−1
4: 4) State Estimate Measurement:
ˆx(k)+ = ˆx(k)−+ L(k)

y(k) →C(k)ˆx(k)−
5: 5) Update Covariance Measurement:
Q(k)+ =

I →L(k)C(k)

Q(k)−
There is an additional version of the Kalman Filter called Extended Kalman Filter (EKF).
It is a non-linear version of the Kalman Filter. As the author of [37] presents: ”The basic
idea of EKF is to focus on the value of first-order non-linear Taylor expansion around
the status of the estimated, then transform the non-linear system into a linear equation
”. Moreover, the EKF needs the computation of the Jacobian matrix at every time step,
which can become large and complicated matrix operations.
In the scope of the project an EKF is use due to the fact that the Jacobian of the system,
i.e. the linearization is doable and can be computed at every time-step.
3.2.2
Controller
For the scope of the project, an important factor guiding the steps followed and approaches
to be tested and implemented is the feasibility and reliability of the solutions provided.
For that reason, the control strategy targeted are the well known PI and PID controllers.
There has been work on the controllers PI and PID for several decades. Those are use
in many industrial applications nowadays due to the known behaviour, extend successful
applications, and reliability.
It is well known that one of the strong points of a PID is the general applicability of those
types of controllers, even though some times those controllers do not obtain an optimal
control. [38]. The basic structure of the controllers is presented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: PID controller
The fact that the project is centred around faults in wind turbines, it is relevant to provide
an approach to adapt or accommodate to a fault the controlling action when a fault is
detected. For that manner, it is relevant to present how a system with multiple controllers
22
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:31==
that can switch and take control over the plan when faults are detected. Figure 3.2 presents
a block diagram with two controllers able to switch with a anti-windup mechanism.
Figure 3.2: Block diagram of an system with an anti-windup controller
The anti-windup mechanism allows the system to continuously feed two controllers with
two different measurement y1 and y2 and the same reference ref. The switch of operation
could be handled by the detection of a specific fault. The benefit of using the anti-windup
scheme is that the system would transition smoothly from controller 1 to controller 2, and
the other way around. An example of usage would be, for example, the use of signals y1
and y2 from different sensors measuring the same output and if one fails, switch to the
other one. One of the signals could also come from an observer, or an approach such as a
virtual sensor.
The way the anti-windup mechanism works is by having both controllers already initialized.
The approach consists on feeding the difference between the output going to the plant u
and the respective controller outputs uc1 and uc2. The controllers are described with the
state space formulation:
˙xci(t) = Aci · xci(t) + Bci · ref(t) + Eci · yi(t)
(3.27)
ui = Cci · xci + Dci · ref(t) + Fci · yi(t)
(3.28)
And with the feeding of the term u(t) →uci(t), the stat space representation of the model
can be defined as:
˙xci(t) = Aci · xci(t) + Bci · ref(t) + Eci · yi(t) + Lci · (u(t) →uci)
(3.29)
ui = Cci · xci + Dci · ref(t) + Fci · yi(t)
(3.30)
Lci must be tuned so that the Aci →Lci · Cci. According to [31]: ”Possible options consist
in choosing L2 so that all eigenvalues lie at the origin, or to use L2 = Bc2D−1
c2 , which
corresponds to the so-called conditioning technique. The latter approach requires a square
full-rank matrix Dc2, although this conditions can be weakened. It also requires that the
zeros of the controller lie in the open left-half plane.”.
With the theoretical concepts and methods described, the following chapter describes how
they are used in order to design a switch controller able to adapt faults in the pitch angle
measurement.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
23
==PAGE:32==
4
Design of a Switch Controller for
Pitch Measurement Fault
This following chapter presents the design procedure followed in order to tackle the dif-
ferent problems on the scope of the thesis. The starting point is the model presented in
section 2.1. First, a list of assumptions is presented and the model is simplified in order to
obtain a set of simpler equations to describe the operation of the hydraulic pitch system.
A set of possible faults is also presented. Based on that, a set of residuals is presented,
and several observers are designed with the aim of mitigating the fault, Finally all those
concepts are combined in a fault tolerant control strategy.
4.1
Assumptions
For the design chapter, and also the results, the following assumptions are considered:
• Single faults. The system implemented assumes that there is only one fault occurring
at a time
• The parameters of the model are assumed to be known and match the simulator.
• The measurements present Gaussian distributed noise.
• The initial conditions for the observers and residuals are known and not faulty.
4.2
Model Simplification
The model presented above contains relations related to the hydraulics and dynamics on
the cylinder, supply circuit, valves, measurements, etc. Must be noticed that, with regards
to the pressure in the supply circuit ps, the system dynamics affected are contained in
Equation 2.3 for ˙ps , and then the computed parameters Voil, qacc and Qrel from Equations
2.9, 2.10 and 2.12. That implies that the entire supply circuit is decoupled from the rest
of the system, except the use of ps for the valves. Figure 4.1 present the profile of ps
obtained in simulation and in experimental data generated by a hydraulic pitch system
located in Aalborg university [39].
24
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:33==
(a) Measurement Obtained on Simulation
(b) Measurement Obtained Experimentally
Figure 4.1: Values for ps obtained.
Figure 4.1a presents the supply pressure ps measured on simulation and Figure 4.1b
presents the supply pressure obtained on experimental data. Both present a very sta-
ble pressure. Must be noted that the simulation parameters are set to nominal values
of a supply pressure of 180 · 105Pa, but the experiments where performed with a higher
supply pressure. The pressure is adjustable by the operator of the testing rig. In both
Figures 4.1a and 4.1b there are oscillations in the pressure, specially when the pitch angle
is changing rapidly. Compared to the nominal value of 180e5 / 190e5 Pa, the oscillations
are minimal (less than a 5% of the nominal value in the simulation results) and would
have a small effect on the dynamics of ps . For that reason, the equation for ˙ps is removed
and the pressure is assumed constant, together with the equations for Voil, qacc and Qrel.
Furthermore, as it is known that the supply pressure has a nominal value, the following
equations is added:
ps = ps0
(4.1)
As a consequence, the model is reduced in size and its understanding is easier. That will
facilitate the study of isolability and detectability properties, the generation of residuals,
fault identification, etc. It must be stated that with this simplification a trade-off between
accuracy and manageability of the model has been chosen. For the thesis, the focus in on
the pitch system itself and not the hydraulic supply pressure circuit. It has been left out
of the scope of the project to handle the effect of those dynamics.
4.3
Model Properties
This following section presents the properties that the model has in regard to the de-
tectability and isolability of faults. The properties of the model are extracted by using
the Matlab toolbox presented in [32]. The toolbox allows obtaining a view of the model
structure, isolability matrix, incidence of the different faults in different matchings, etc.
It performs a structural analysis in order to obtain the isolability properties of the model
and its faults. The isolability can be studied with both derivative and integral causality.
When using integral causality, there is terms that are integrated from iteration to itera-
tion. That could lead to inaccurate values if the initial conditions are not know, or have
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
25
==PAGE:34==
a large uncertainty. On top of that, potential large drifts of the integrated value could
occur due to noise.
4.3.1
Detectability and Isolability of the whole model
In regard to the whole model, i.e. without considering the operational regions, the struc-
ture obtained is presented in 4.2a. The system has a total of 29 equations with 4 differential
constraints. It is a forth order system.
(a) Model Structure
(b) Isolability Matrix
Figure 4.2: Properties of the whole model
Figure 4.2a presents the structure of the model. Every row is an equation, and every dot
represents the incidence of the different variable in the model. Figure 4.2b presents the
isolability properties of the model. It can be seen that the fault on the torque/friction of
the system cannot be detected nor isolated. That is mainly because, as it can be observed
in Figure 4.2a with the structure of the system, the constraints bound together almost all
the variable associated to the torque (Ffric, Mcyl, Mext, etc.). Apart from that, the rest
of the defined faults are isolable.
While exploring of the different equations of the presented model, and how those can affect
the isolability properties of the model, special attention has been paid to the equation for
the internal leakage Qi. When the coeﬀicient Cli linking the pressures in pp and pr to the
leakage is set to be 0 - indicating that there is no leakage - it has been obtained that the
isolability properties of the model are changed.
26
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:35==
(a) Model Structure
(b) Isolability Matrix
Figure 4.3: Properties of the whole model without leakage Qi
Figure 4.3a presents the newly obtained structure, and it is very similar to the one pre-
sented for the original version of the model (Figure 4.2a). On the other hand, the isolability
properties presented in it are different to the ones presented previously. The faults on the
dynamics of ˙pp and ˙pr cannot be isolated from the faults in the measurements fm,pp and
fm,pr, respectively. That results in the need of having a modelled leakage in order to not
lose isolability on those faults.
Finally, In order to explore the possibility of including more information about the sys-
tem, an Mext has been modelled as a measurement with a fault: Mext = y5 + fMext. That
assumption is motivated by the fact that there is active research on the estimation of such
term, like the one presented in [40] and [30]. The studies present examples of measur-
ing/reconstructing rich signals and consequently detecting friction changes. From that, it
seems feasible to use estimated values for unknown variables of the sort of Mext.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Model Structure
(b) Isolability Matrix
Figure 4.4: Properties of the whole model with known Mext
It can be seen in Figure 4.4a that the structure is very similar to the one presented in
4.2a, but the isolability matrix presented in Figure 4.4b indicates that all faults could be
isolated, with the exception of the fault fmom and fMext, which could only be detected but
not isolated. For that reason, having some sort of observer or estimator for the variable
Mext would provide great isolability properties to the current model. But this is out of
the scope of the project.
4.3.2
Detectability and Isolability of the model with cases
In regard to the different operational cases of the model defined in section 2.2, it is expected
that having equations with Heaviside function can lead to some variables not appearing
in some equations, some of the isolability and detectability properties get affected. The
different cases are implemented in MATLAB, and the same procedure as per the whole
model is followed. The resulting isolability matrixes are presented in Figure 4.5.
28
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: Isolability for the four operational cases
It can be seen in Figure 4.5 that the isolability properties are changed with respect to
the ones presented in the full model on operational case 1 and 2. On those cases it is not
possible to isolate the input fault fu from the process fault fpp. That is due to to the fact
that on the operational cases 1 and 2 the valve position xv is positive, the flow Qrv is zero,
so the dependency on the input, which is reflected in xv to no longer be there, indicating
that there is no path in the equations that allows to separate between a possible fault on
the input or a fault on the dynamics in ˙pp.
Moreover, if the case where the leakage on Qi is zero, the following isolability properties
are obtained:
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.6: Isolability for the four operational cases without Qi
It can be seen in Figure 4.6 that the effect of losing the equation for Qi is still present in
the different operational cases. The effect is more noticeable on operational cases 1 and
2 where now is the three faults fu, fm,pp and fpp that are non-isolable from each other.
Also, as it would be expected, for cases 3 and 4 the process faults fpp and fpr cannot be
differentiated from the measurements faults fpp,m and fpr,m respectively.
With those isolability properties it is proven the need of taking into account the operational
cases into the generation and usage of residuals.
4.4
Residual Generation
The generation of the residuals is performed with the Fault Diagnosis Toolbox [32] that
has been used to obtain the properties of the model.
The toolbox utilizes the Minimally Structurally Overdetermined (MSO) set of equations
for the generation of the residuals, which can be spread in the following steps:
• Model Definition, properties and verification.
• Generate Minimal Structural Overdetermined (MSO) set of equations.
• Iterate over all the MSO sets of equations obtained for the model.
30
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:39==
• Causality Check. This steps would be an optional step in order to, in case needed,
remove a specific causality of the generated residuals. The causalities are: integral,
derivative, mixed and algebraic.
• Residual Generation. Use of the function SeqResGen from the toolbox. This function
takes advantage of the fact that every MSO has one equation more than the number
of unknown variables. That allows the use of one of the equations to be used as the
residual equation while the exactly determined part of the MSO is used to solve all
the unknown values [33].
The output of the residual generation steps is a file, in this case a Matlab file .m which
contains the structure presented in the code snippet shown in Listing 1.
During the
implementation has been found that some of the calls to the generation of residuals would
not get resolve in more than 60 seconds. That can become a problem if the generation
of residuals needs to be systematic and robust.
Per this case, the residuals are to be
generated for each of the operational cases and also for the ”general” case including all
the residuals. The reason to generate all of them is to be able to be able to handle all
operational regions, and also be able to compare the residuals that need the switching of
the system and not.
For that reason, the generation of residual is implemented is illustrated in Figure 4.7. It
presents each of the steps implemented in order to obtain all the possible residuals from
all the MSOs obtained.
Figure 4.7: Flowchart for the generation of the residuals
During the implementation and testing it has been observed that some of the cases in the
MSO would become infeasible, rising an error that would stop the generation. For that
reason, when the generation of residuals becomes infeasible, the algorithm steps to the
next set of the MSO. If for any reason, the generation did not finish successfully, then the
reason for the finishing is checked. If the reason is that the subprocess timed out, then
the rest of the sets in the MSO generated are skipped and the following set of MSO is
processed. If the error is due to a different reason, e.g. there is an equation that cannot
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
31
==PAGE:40==
be solve for that specific case, then the next set in the MSO is selected. The main reason
to step to the next set of MSO when the procedure reached the timeout is because during
the implementation and testing has been observed that when the system times out on the
first instance, the rest of sets in the MSO also timeout.
A note on the Causality Check is that during the design process of the solution, some
model mismatches and errors have been encountered. For that reason, the generation of the
residuals was clustered into only derivative causality, mixed causality, algebraic causality
and integral causality. That help finding out where in the model was the mismatched and
solve all the residuals with integral causality that seemed to grow unbounded, or derivative
residuals that encountered invalid computations such as divisions by infinite, on invalid
operations in expressions including the mathematical operations: arccos and arcsin.
After utilizing the presented algorithm, the residuals obtained had the structure presented
in Listing 1.
1
function [r, state] = foo(z, state, params, Ts)
2
% Parameters
3
% ....
4
% Known Variables
5
% ....
6
% Residual Generation Body
7
% ....
8
r = ....; % residual signal
9
% Integral Terms
10
% ....
11
% Update State
12
% ....
13
end
Listing 1: Structure of the Residual Generation function
The input arguments for the function are:
• z as the known measurements from the sensors.
• state as the variable which state is to be carried from iteration to iteration for
numerical computations.
• params as the set of known parameters used for the computation.
• Ts as the sampling period.
The system needs the custom lookup table Kv(xv), the Heaviside function H(x), and the
sign function. Those function are not available if the system needs to be implemented in
Matlab - Simulink. For that reason, a custom parser has been implemented in order to
add the custom functions to the residual generation code blocks used in Simulink. The
following section presents the details on that parser and how is used during the project.
Parser and Compiled Residuals
Due to the fact that the residuals obtained are in Matlab, and according to [41] it is not
of the most used and common programming languages, it would be of interest for a real
live implementation to obtain the residuals compiled in a more widely used programming
languages such ash C.
32
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:41==
In order to do that, the work started in the special course [42] is continued. The parser
implemented to convert the Matlab code to valid C code is improved and a framework
that allows the testing of the residuals is developed, obtaining the residuals response to
different faults and assessing the detectability and isolability properties based on those
reactions. The main focus of the improvement on the already existing code is to provide
an easy to run tool that, given a set of residuals outputted from the toolbox [32] and a set
of scenarios, parses the residuals C code and runs the scenarios generating a summary of
the results obtained.
The parser has been mainly used for fast iteration on the definition of results, finding
mismatches between the model used, the simulator and the real plant, and overall the
development of the thesis. It has helped adjusting parameters and equations from the
model definition, and rapidly be able to see the effect on the residuals when applied to
the scenarios.
Figure 4.8: Block diagram of the tool implemented
Figure 4.8 presets the different steps that the implemented tool executes. It is relevant to
note that on the Parse Residuals step, the conversion to C and Simulink Code is made by
using the Residual Generation Body by doing string processing of the files generated with
the shape presented in the Listing 1.
Moreover, it implements the capability of parsing the Matlab functions generated by the
toolbox [32] to a more easy to manage Matlab function. The main reason for that was to
be able to implement the residuals in Simulink such that the simulator can also compute
live residuals for simulation process.
The residuals obtained are presented in Appendix A.1.2. For the sensitivities and residuals
obtained, six residuals are needed to obtain the isolability properties presented. The details
on sensitivity are presented in chapter 5.
4.4.1
GLR for Residual Evaluation
As mentioned in the section 3.1.3, a GLR test can be used to detect the change of a
residuals when the system stops operating under the known nominal conditions.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
33
==PAGE:42==
Following the expressions presented in the above mentioned section, a numerical version
is implemented in order to compute the decision function g(k), dependant on the residual
at the time instant k so it can be compared with a threshold in order to detect a fault.
The algorithm is implemented as displayed in Listing 2.
1
function [g] = glr(residual, M, sigma, mu_0)
2
r = residual;
3
N = length(r);
4
g = zeros(1, N);
5
idx = ones(1, N);
6
mu_1 = zeros(1, N);
7
for k = M:N
8
S = zeros(M, 1);
9
z = r(k-M+1:k);
10
for j = 1:M
11
sum_sq = 0;
12
for i = j:M
13
sum_sq = sum_sq + (z(i) - mu_0);
14
end
15
S(j) = sum_sq^2/((M - j + 1)*2*sigma^2);
16
end
17
[g(k), idx(k)] = max(S);
18
if k-M+idx(k)+1 <= k
19
mu_1(k) = mean(r(k-M+idx(k):k));
20
else
21
mu_1(k) = mu_0;
22
end
23
end
24
end
Listing 2: GLR numerical implementation
The values for M, σ and µ0 are parameters. Given that in the scenarios defined there is
a healthy scenario, the values for σ and µ0 are computed from it, following an empirical
procedure.
The window size M and the threshold h have an effect on the probability of false alarm and
the probability of detection. As mentioned in subsection 4.4.1, the residual distribution
can be used to compute the threshold and window size. For the scope of the project, an
empirical approach is followed, and it is assumed that the residuals do follow a normal
Gaussian distribution.
To obtain the window size M for the GLR, the healthy scenario and the faulty scenario 2
are used. From that, the window sizes M = 50, 100, 250, 300, 500 are selected and applied
to the residuals. Figure 4.9 presets the effect of different window size M on one of the
residuals used for the detection and isolation of faults.
34
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:43==
(a) GLR on residuals 4 in Scenario 1
(b) GLR on residuals 4 in Scenario 2 (fault on
β)
Figure 4.9: Effect on M size in the GLR for residual 4
Moreover, the amount of time and iterations use in the computation of the GLR (given
that is computed offline on each of the scenarios) is presented in Table 4.1.
Window Size - M
Iterations
Time [s]
50
11413800
0.0148
100
44955100
0.0374
250
274594000
0.1906
500
1064875500
0.7030
Table 4.1: Computational complexity and time for GLR computation (healthy scenario)
The iterations belong to a simulation of 200 s with a sample time of 1ms and a decimation
value of the residual of 20. The time indication is obtained by computing using Matlab
2025, and MacBook Pro M4
From Figure 4.9, it can be seen that the larger the window size, the larger is the transition
time of the residual when a fault is present, and also larger values are obtained. In regard
to the amount of iterations used to compute the GLR, it can be seen that it increase
exponentially with M. For that reason, a size M = 250 is chosen.
For the selection of the values of the thresholds, the empirical procedures followed has
been:
• Run all the residuals on Scenario 1 (healthy) and process the GLR (with M = 250).
• Obtain the max value of every residuals.
• Compute hi = max(ri) · 1.10 (where i is each of the residuals).
The values obtained for the six residuals utilized are presented in Table 4.2.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
35
==PAGE:44==
Residual
1
2
3
4
5
6
Threshold
2.00e06
7.96e03
6.83e03
4.70e04
1.09e03
4.83e04
Table 4.2: Thresholds for the evaluation of residuals
4.5
Observer Design
The role of an observer is to estimate the states needed to control the pitch system. Due
to the nature of the faults on the system - where the sensors for the pressures, the pitch
angle, the input or process can be faulty - it is relevant to be able to have observers that
are not affected by those faults. Moreover, the knowledge from the residuals can be used
in order to determine if the system is operation under nominal conditions, or there is any
fault present. Hence, it is assumed for the scope of the project and the design of the
observers that, whenever there is a fault on the system, it is a single fault and it can be
isolated. From that, different observers can be designed to handle correct operation when
the system is healthy or has a known fault.
4.5.1
Observer β
The first observer presented is an observer used to estimate the pitch angle β, also the
estimation of the unknown external momentum Mext.
The approach followed for this
implementation use the relation between the acceleration of the pitch angle β, i.e.:
¨β =
1
Jtot
(MCyl →Mext →Mfric)
(4.2)
(4.3)
Where the term Jtot is the inertial of the blade, MCyl and Mfric are computed from the
Equations 2.17 to 2.22. With that, the terms are non linear, but can be grouped and
treated as a know term Ψ(z). The Equation 4.2 can be re-written as:
¨β = →1
Jtot
Mext + Ψ(z)
(4.4)
(4.5)
Where z are known measurements. From that, it can be see that the system presented
becomes a linear system with the form:
˙x = A · x + B · u + Ψ(z) =⇒
(4.6)
˙x =


˙vβ
˙β
˙Mext

=


0
0
→1
Jtot
1
0
0
0
0
0




vβ
β
Mext

+


0
0
0

u +


Ψ(z)
0
0


(4.7)
The state vector for the observer can be defined as:
x =


vβ
β
Mext


(4.8)
Where vβ = ¨β, z are known measurements from the plant. Moreover, the dynamics of
Mext are considered to be slower compared to the states vβ and β, so the terms associated
36
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:45==
on the state matrix A defined are zero. Lastly, the measurement matrix C is defined as:
y =

0
1
0

(4.9)
since only the pitch angle β is measured.
With that, a Lueremberg Observer is implemented. Before the design of the observer
is presented, it has been checked that the system defined is observable. For that, the
observability matrix between A and C is computed and the rank is checked. Per this
case, the rank observer is three, which matches the dimensions of the system defined
(three), indicating that all the states are reachable.
With that, pole placement is used to compute the optimal gain matrix. Usually, the poles
for the observer are chosen ten times faster than the poles of the system. Due to the fact
that poles of the system are all zero, the tuning of the values started with placing a pure
real negative eigenvalue at →10 and a complex pair at →9 ± 2j, and have been tuned to
the final values →210 and →180 ± 2j.
The observer is implemented in Matlab. Figure 4.10 presents the behaviour of the observer
when the system operates under nominal conditions.
(a) Estimates vs Real values
(b) Error Between the estimates and the real val-
ues
Figure 4.10: Observer for β and MExt
It can be seen in Figure 4.10b how the error remains around one order of magnitude
bellow the nominal value. It can also be seen that around second 140 - 150 seconds of the
simulation, the errors increases slightly. That is due to the fact that the system executes
fast movements of the blade pitch, so the assumption that the dynamics on ˙vβ being equal
to zero is not accurate during the entire simulation.
With that, a final remark on the design of this observer is that the measurements for the
pitch angle β and the pressures pp and pr are used. If the system presents a fault on any
of the sensors, the estimate of β will no longer be valid. For that reason, the following
presents a different approach to the observer design.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
37
==PAGE:46==
4.5.2
Observer xcyl and β
This subsection presents the design of a observer for the state xcyl, which can be used
to obtain the pitch angle β. For the design of the observer it is considered a single fault
system, and for the purpose of estimating the cylinder position, and hence the pitch angle,
the sensor pp and pr will be considered ideal, and a fault on the angle β is perfectly isolable.
The main goal of designing an observer for xcyl is to make it independent from the measure-
ment of the pitching angle β so that a fault on that sensor would not affect our estimate
ˆxcyl. Notice that obtaining the estimate for ˆxcyl implies that the relation
xcyl(β) =
#
→cos(β + Φoffset) · 2 · LBE · LAE + L2
BE + L2
AE →LAB ⇒
(4.10)
β(xcyl)) = arccos
%L2
BE + L2
AE →(xcyl + LAB)2
2 · LBE · LAE
&
→Φoffset
(4.11)
Can be utilized in order to compute the pitch angle. In order to obtain an observer that is
independent from the measurement of the pitch angle to compute the pitch angle, different
approaches are followed. First and foremost, it most be noticed that on the dynamical
relations:
˙pp = (Qp →Ap ˙xcyl →Qi) · βeffp
Ap · xcyl + Vp0
(4.12)
˙pr =
(Ar ˙xcyl →Qr + Qi) · βeffr
Ar · (CylStroke →xcyl) + Vr0
(4.13)
The state xcyl and its derivative ˙xcyl are present in both expressions presented. Moreover,
it can be seen that the rest of the terms on the computation of ˙pp and ˙pr are constants
with the exception of the flows Qp and Qr, which depend on the position of the valve
controlling the cylinder xv, and the pressures pp and pr. With that, the expression for the
dynamical relations can be expressed as:
˙pp = αp(xcyl) · (Qp(pp, pr, xv) →Ap · ˙xcyl →Qi(pp, pr, xv))
(4.14)
˙pr = αr(xcyl) · (Qp(pp, pr, xv) →Ap · ˙xcyl →Qi(pp, pr, xv))
(4.15)
Where the functions αp and αr can be defined as:
αp(xcyl) =
βeff,p
Ap · xcyl + Vp0
(4.16)
αp(xcyl) =
βeff,r
Ar · (Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0
(4.17)
For the scope of the design of the observer for the pitch angle, the valve position xv is
considered known, and the pressures pp, pr and ps are measured. With that, the system can
be casted as a forth order system with states pp, pr, xcyl and ˙xcyl, which can also be refered
as the velocity of the cylinder vcyl. The following subsections present different approaches
to the design of an observer that can estimate those states, and special interested is in xcyl,
since it will be used to compute the pitch angle β independently from the measurement
of β, so it is not affected by faults in the pitch angle measurement.
Three different approaches are designed in order to obtain an observer for the pitch angle
β. They are presented as follows:
38
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:47==
Algebraic Terms
The first and more direct approach to compute xcyl is using directly the algebraic relations
from ˙pp, ˙pr and the different flows Qp, Qr, Qcv, Qrv and Qi to obtain a relation for xcyl,
which then is used directly to compute the pitch angle following known algebraic relations
from the model.
This approach assumes a perfect match between the model of the hydraulic pitch system
and the real plant. The pressures pp, pr and ps are assumed to be known and operating
under nominal conditions. It is also assumed that there is not process or actuator/input
faults. Those assumptions rely on the fact that, as proven in previous sections, with the
model presented, there is full isolability on those faults.
With that Algorithm 2 presents the implementation described above.
Algorithm 2 Algebraic Observer for xcyl.
1: for t = t0 to T do
2:
1) Known signals computation:
3:
Parse the known input signals ps, pp, pr and xv.
4:
Numerical differentiation to obtain ˆ˙pp and ˆ˙pr.
5:
Compute Qp(ps, pp, pr, xv), Qr(ps, pp, pr, xv) and Qi(ps, pp, pr, xv) from the known
input signals.
6:
2) Estimate Differentials:
7:
Compute ˆ˙xcyl(t) = (Qp(t) →Qi(t)) · ˙pp(t)·(Ap·ˆxcyl(t−1)+Vp,0)
βeff,p
8:
3) Integration:
9:
Perform numerical computations:
ˆxcyl(t) = ˆxcyl(t →1) + Ts · ˆ˙xcyl(t)
10: end for
The procedure consists of three separated steps. The first consists on using the known sig-
nals to compute the terms that depend on them exclusively. The numerical differentiation
of pp and pr is performed using the following expression
˙y(t0) = y(t0) →y(t0 →h)
h
(4.18)
The computations for the flows Qp, Qr and Qi follow the equations presented in section 2.1.
Once the known terms are computed, the differential terms ˆ˙xcyl(t), ˆ˙pp and ˆ˙pr are computed.
Those computations make use of the known relations and equations presented in above.
The expression for ˆ˙xcyl(t) is obtained from solving Equation 4.12 for ˙xcyl. Notice that the
term xcyl is in the operation, but it is assumed that from iteration to iteration, due to
the short sampling time, xcyl(t) ⇒xcyl(t →1). For that reason, the previous estimate ˆxcyl
is utilized to compute the following ˆ˙xcyl. After that computation, the estimate computed
of ˙xcyl is used to, using again Equation 4.12, and also Equation 4.13, to compute the
estimates of ˆ˙pp and ˆ˙pr.
With those estimated values, numerical integration is used in the form ˆx(t) = ˆx(t →1) +
Ts · ˆ˙x(t) to compute the estimates: ˆxcyl, ˆpp and ˆpr.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
39
==PAGE:48==
The approach implemented provides accurate estimates under the assumption that, again,
there is a perfect match between the plant and the model. But it is usually the cases that
parameters such as friction and bulk modulus, or measurement noise could potentially
make the estimates drift and, overtime, differ substantially from the real values. For that
reason, the next approach is presented.
Algebraic Terms with Correction Term
As mentioned, the previous approach does not handle any uncertainties, differences or
drifts between the model and the real plant. For that reason, a modification to the pure
algebraic solution is suggested. Inspired by the well known Lueremberg Observer approach,
where an innovation signal is used in order to correct possible miss-matches between plant
and model, the following implementation is suggested:
Algorithm 3 Algebraic Observer for xcyl with Correction Term.
1: for t = t0 to T do
2:
1) Known signals computation:
3:
Parse the known input signals ps, pp, pr and xv.
4:
Numerical differentiation to obtain ˆ˙pp and ˆ˙pr.
5:
Compute Qp(ps, pp, pr, xv), Qr(ps, pp, pr, xv) and Qi(ps, pp, pr, xv) from the known
input signals.
6:
2) Estimate Differentials:
7:
Compute ˆ˙xcyl(t) = (Qp(t) →Qi(t)) · ˙pp(t)·(Ap·ˆxcyl(t−1)+Vp,0)
βeff,p
8:
Compute ˆ˙pp(t) = (Qp(t)−Ap·ˆ˙xcyl(t)−Qi(t))·βeff,p
Ap·ˆxcyl(t−1)+Vp0
9:
Compute ˆ˙pr(t) = (Ar·ˆ˙xcyl(t)−Qr(t)+Qi(t))·βeff,r
Ar·ˆxcyl(t−1)+Vr0
10:
3) Integration:
11:
Perform numerical computations:
ˆxcyl(t) = ˆxcyl(t →1) + Ts · ˆ˙xcyl(t)
ˆpp(t) = ˆpp(t →1) + Ts · ˆ˙pp(t)
ˆpr(t) = ˆpr(t →1) + Ts · ˆ˙pr(t)
12:
4) Innovation and Correction:
13:
Compute the error: ep = pp(t) →ˆpp(t) and er = pr(t) →ˆpr(t)
14:
Correct the estimate:
ˆ˙xcyl,corrected(t) = ˆ˙xcyl(t) + L1 ·
;ep
er

ˆ˙pp,corrected(t) = ˆ˙pp(t) + L2 ·
;ep
er

ˆ˙pr,corrected(t) = ˆ˙pr(t) + L3 ·
;ep
er

15:
Integrate the corrected value:
ˆxcyl,corrected(t) = ˆxcyl,corrected(t →1) + Ts · ˆ˙xcyl,corrected(t)
16: end for
Algorithm 3 describes the step by step approach for the algebraic term with correction.
The first three steps are the same as the ones presented in Algorithm 2. The last step
40
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:49==
is where the correction is included. First, the correction is applied based on the known
measurements pp and pr.
The error is computed with the difference between the known value, i.e. the measurements,
and the estimated values. That error is then multiplied by what would be called, if a linear
Lueremberg Observer was implemented, observer gain. For the implementation and scope
of the project it has been implemented as a 1×2 gain matrix. That allows to have different
weights to the correction term for pp and pr.
The magnitude is to be tuned and is a trade-off between aggressiveness and rate of correc-
tion. Due to the large difference in magnitude that there is between ˙xcyl and the pressure
measurements, which are of the order of 1 · 108 Pa, the gains are expected to be rather
small for L1, between the orders 1 · 10−13 to 1 · 10−11 to get an order of 1 · 10−4 on the
correction term. On the other hand, the correction terms for the pressure estimates do
not need to be that small do the magnitude.
The values obtained are:
L1 =

1.9 · 10−11
→1.9 · 10−12
L2 =

1
0

L3 =

0
1

(4.19)
The values for L1 are tuned such that the magnitude of the pressure becomes around 10 to
20% of the magnitude of xc, while not destabilizing the estimation of the desired variable.
From there, the values have been tuned until reaching the values presented above. The
tuning method involved running the simulations with the nominal values until the error
obtained did perform as the error presented for the observers in Chapter 5, around an
order of magnitude for the pitch angle estimated. For the matrixes L2 and L3 are also
tuned experimentally.
Figure 4.11 presents the step by step computations in the form of a block diagram.
Figure 4.11: Block diagram of the Algebraic Terms with Correction Term implementation
Extended Kalman Filter
Lastly, an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is implemented in order to estimate the internal
states of the system, specifically, the interest is in the cylinder position xcyl. As it was
explained the theory section, a Kalman Filter makes use of a prediction step and an
update/correction step in order to adapt the Kalman gain to minimizing the covariance
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
41
==PAGE:50==
of the prediction. The state vector of the system is:
x =


pp
pr
xcyl
˙xcyl


(4.20)
And the dynamics can be casted as:
˙x = f(x) =


βeff,p
Apxcyl+Vp0

Qp →Ap ˙xcyl →Qi

βeff,r
Ar(Cylstroke−xcyl)+Vr0

Ar ˙xcyl →Qr + Qi

˙xcyl
θ


(4.21)
where the measurements available are:
h(x) =
;pp
pr

(4.22)
and the pitch angle dynamics to be reconstructed is modelled as a random walk process.
As already mentioned, the relations presented in 4.21 are not linear. That implies that for
the design of an Extended Kalman Filter. The Jacobian Matrices representing the relation
between the state x and its derivative ˙x is obtained as: A = δf
δx and C = δh
δx. That would
be equivalent to linearizing the system at every time-step in order to be able to apply an
EKF. Those are computes as:
A = ∂f
∂x =


∂˙pp
∂pp
∂˙pp
∂pr
∂˙pp
∂xcyl
∂˙pp
∂˙xcyl
∂˙pr
∂pp
∂˙pr
∂pr
∂˙pr
∂xcyl
∂˙pr
∂˙xcyl
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0


(4.23)
Where the terms are defined as
42
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:51==
∂˙pp
∂pp
=
βeff,p
Apxcyl + Vp0
%∂Qp
∂pp
→∂Qi
∂pp
&
(4.24)
∂˙pp
∂pr
=
βeff,p
Apxcyl + Vp0
%∂Qp
∂pr
→∂Qi
∂pr
&
(4.25)
∂˙pp
∂xcyl
= →βeff,pAp

Qp →Ap ˙xcyl →Qi

(Apxcyl + Vp0)2
+
βeff,p
Apxcyl + Vp0
% ∂Qp
∂xcyl
→∂Qi
∂xcyl
&
(4.26)
∂˙pp
∂˙xcyl
=
βeff,p
Apxcyl + Vp0
% ∂Qp
∂˙xcyl
→Ap →∂Qi
∂˙xcyl
&
(4.27)
∂˙pr
∂pp
=
βeff,r
Ar(Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0
%∂Qi
∂pp
→∂Qr
∂pp
&
(4.28)
∂˙pr
∂pr
=
βeff,r
Ar(Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0
%∂Qi
∂pr
→∂Qr
∂pr
&
(4.29)
∂˙pr
∂xcyl
= →βeff,rAr

Ar ˙xcyl →Qr + Qi

(Ar(Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0)2
+
βeff,r
Ar(Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0
% ∂Qi
∂xcyl
→∂Qr
∂xcyl
&
(4.30)
∂˙pr
∂˙xcyl
=
βeff,r
Ar(Cylstroke →xcyl) + Vr0
%
Ar + ∂Qi
∂˙xcyl
→∂Qr
∂˙xcyl
&
(4.31)
For the flow Qp:
Qp(pp, xv) =
Kv(xv)
#
|ps →pp| · sign(ps →pp) · H(xv)
→Kv(xv)
#
|pt →pp| · sign(pt →pp) · H(→xv)
(4.32)
∂Qp
∂pp
= →Kv(xv) H(xv)
2
$
|ps →pp|
+ Kv(xv) H(→xv)
2
$
|pt →pp|
,
(pp ̸= ps, pt)
(4.33)
∂Qp
∂pr
= 0
∂Qp
∂xcyl
= 0
∂Qp
∂˙xcyl
= 0
(4.34)
For the flow Qr:
Qr(pr, xv) = →φvalveKv(xv)
$
|pr →ps| · sign(pr →ps) · H(→xv)
+ (pr →ps →pcv) · Kcv · H(pr →ps →pcv)
(4.35)
∂Qr
∂pr
= →φvalve · Kv(xv) · H(→xv)
2
$
|pr →ps|
+ Kcv · H(pr →ps →pcv)
(pr ̸= ps)
(4.36)
∂Qr
∂pp
= 0
∂Qr
∂xcyl
= 0
∂Qr
∂˙xcyl
= 0
(4.37)
(4.38)
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
43
==PAGE:52==
Lastly, for the flow Qi:
Qi(pp, pr) = Cli · (pp →pr)
(4.39)
∂Qi
∂pp
= Cli
∂Qi
∂pr
= →Cli
∂Qi
∂xcyl
= 0
∂Qi
∂˙xcyl
= 0
(4.40)
The Jacobian for the measurement matrix C is defined as:
C = ∂h
∂x =
;1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

(4.41)
The Jacobians A and C are computed at every iteration.
In order to avoid potential
numerical problems leading to infinity values on the derivatives, those computations can
be bounded to„ e.g. a max value of ±1e14. During execution it is also checked that the
matrixes A and C defined are observable, and a warning is output if they are not. It
can happen that at some time instants the matrix becomes unobservable, but during the
developing of the design it has been found that it recovers after a few samples, avoid the
estimate to diverge in a from the real value.
The discrete version of the Extended Kalman Filter steps predict and update can be
computed as:
• State prediction with a priory knowledge
ˆxk|−= Fkˆxk−1|k−1 + Bkuk
(4.42)
• Estimate of the covariance:
Qk|−= Fk−1Qk−1|+F⊤
k−1 + Ck−1V1C⊤
k−1
(4.43)
Notice that the matrix F is the discretized version of A. The discretisation is per-
formed as F = eA·Ts.
• The Kalman Gain is computed as
Sk =
?
CkQkC⊤
k + V2
−1
(4.44)
Lk = QkC⊤
k S−1
k
(4.45)
• State update with the Kalman gain and the innovation measure
ˆxk|+ = ˆxk|−+ Lk

yk →Ckˆxk|−

(4.46)
• Update the covariance:
Qk|+ = (I →LkCk) Qk|−
(4.47)
For the scope of the project, the different steps for the computations described above are
implemented in Matlab. Moreover, also the scope of the project assumes to know the
initial conditions of the states, and that they are not faulty, to avoid bias and possible
instability. The algorithm implemented is described in the Algorithm 4
44
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:53==
Algorithm 4 Extended Kalman Filter to compute xcyl.
1: for t = t0 to T do
2:
1) Predict step:
3:
a) Compute α terms
4:
b) Compute Qp, Qr and Qi, and the derivatives
5:
c) Compute Jacobian At = ∂f
∂x and Ct = ∂h
∂x
6:
d) Discretized At as Ft
7:
d) Compute the predicted state estimate xt|−
8:
e) Compute the predicted estimate covariance Qk|−
9:
2) Correction step:
10:
a) Compute the innovation prediction yinn = yk →Ckˆxk|−
11:
b) Kalman Gain Computation Lk
12:
c) State Update xt|+ = xt|t−1 + Lk · yinn
13:
d) Covariance Update for the next iteration Qk|+
14:
3) Computation of the Pitch angle β:
15:
ˆβt|t = arccos
? L2
BE+L2
AE−(ˆxcyl t|t+LAB)2
2·LBE·LAE

→Φoffset
16: end for
The computation is presented with a for loop starting at time t0 and continues until time
T, but the purpose of the Kalman Filter is that it can actually implement an estimate of
the states running live. In the Chapter 5 the performance of this state estimation will be
presented. It must be noted that, since the only measurement used are the pressures one,
any fault in the β sensor would not affect the estimation of the actual real pitch angle
value. Moreover, it must also be noticed that the state estimated by the Extended Kalman
Filter is the cylinder position xcyl. In order to obtain the estimate of the pitch angle β,
an extra step is needed:
The last step presented in Algorithm 4 consists on the application of the geometric relation
between the cylinder position and the actual pitch angle. Must be noticed that this relation
is considered to always hold.
Figure 4.12 presents the step by step computations in the form of a block diagram.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.12: Block diagram for the Extended Kalman filter implemented
For the system, matrix V1 and V2 are:
V1 =


1 · 106
0
0
0
0
1 · 106
0
0
0
0
1 · 10−4
0
0
0
0
1 · 10−2


V2 =
;1 · 107
0
0
1 · 108

(4.48)
The values for the matrix V2 come from the measurement variance. The values for V1 have
been found as a tuning process until an error one order of magnitude below the value of
the pitch angle β is obtained (∼1 · 10−4).
4.6
Control Strategy
The control strategy for the solution developed has been mainly focused on making use
of the detection signal coming from the residuals to detect when there is a fault.
As
mentioned, the target of the project is on a fault on the pitch angle. From the controller
point of view it is assumed that there is a signal that detects and isolate when a fault on
the pitch angle β happens. When a fault is present on the pitch angle measurement, if the
system still makes use of the bad measurement, it would track a wrong reading, leading to
the real pitch angle to be wrong. For that reason, the observers presented in the previous
section are used. Figure 4.13 presents a block diagram of the solution implemented.
46
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.13: Block diagram for the control strategy
The solution designed consists on having an nominal controller, which compares the ref-
erence with the measurement of β, and a secondary controller that use the estimated of
β instead of the measurement. The switch that enables the use of one or the other con-
troller is controlled by the detection and isolation of a fault in the β measurement. Both
controllers have the same PI configuration.
In order obtain a smooth transition when switch changes from one controller to the other,
an anti-windup scheme, as the one previously introduced in the theory chapter, is used.
Controller 1 is marked with a green box and the label Controller 1: nominal β measure-
ment. That controller is gonna be operating when the plant does not present faults on
the measurement of the pitch angle.
Controller 2 is marked with a green box and the label Controller 2: faulty β measurement.
That controller is gonna operate only when the signal to the input of the switch is triggered
by the detection and isolation of a fault in the β measurement.
Following Equation 3.29, the controller state space representation is modified to fit the
definition of a PI controller with the feeding of the term L · (u →uci). The matrix from
the equation presented is
Aci = 0
Cci = 1
(4.49)
Bci = Ki
Dci = Kp
(4.50)
Eci = →Ki
Fci = →Kp
(4.51)
Li = Ki · L
(4.52)
With that, the tracking error is defined for each controller e1 = r →βm and e2 = r →ˆβ.The
state space representation is:
˙xc = Ki · ec + Ki · L · (u →uc)
(4.53)
uc = xc + Kp · ec
(4.54)
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
47
==PAGE:56==
Some values for the controller where provided with the one of the model simulator, so the
same values are used:
Kp = 90
Ki = 60
(4.55)
(4.56)
Then the equation for the condition technique presented in the theory chapter is applied,
and the gain L for the controller is computed as:
Lc = Bc2
Dc2
= Ki
Kp
= 0.666
(4.57)
Lc = Ki · L →L = Lc
Ki
= 1
Kp
= 0.011
(4.58)
The value is tuned up to L = 0.0167 due to a response with less undershoot. Figure 4.14
presents the different responses for the different values of L tuned.
Figure 4.14: Comparison for the switch controller with different values of L
The source code with the files for the design presented can be found in Appendix A.3
48
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:57==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained for the different implementations developed and
explained. The results are presented in three different sections: residuals, observers and
the combinations of both to drive adaptation.
5.1
Evaluation of the Set of Residuals Designed
On this first section, the results for the residuals developed during the project is presented.
The residuals are implemented with both the model considering internal leakage Qi and
not, i.e. the relation Qi = Cli · (pp →pr) is in the model or not. That is done due to
the fact that including that relation actually allows full isolability for all the faults except
between the faults fmom and fMext as already presented in Figure 4.2b. In order to obtain
that isolability, with the generated residuals, there is a total of 6 residuals needed. The
sensitivity list of each of the residuals is provided by the toolbox used to generate the
residuals. That is used to obtain then the minimal set of residuals. The sensitivity list of
the residuals obtained is:
Residual
Sensitive to
Residual 1
fm,ps
Residual 2
fpp, fmβ, fm,pp, fm,pr, fu
Residual 3
fpp, fpr, fmβ, fm,pp, fu
Residual 4
fpp, fpr, fmβ, fm,pr, fu
Residual 5
fpp, fpr, fm,pp, fm,pr, fu
Residual 6
fpr, fmβ, fm,pp, fm,pr, fu
Table 5.1: Residual sensitivities to faults
With that sensitivity list, the signature of residuals to isolate each of the isolable/de-
tectable faults is the one presented in Table 5.2
Residual
fm,ps
fpp
fpr
fm,β
fm,pp
fm,pr
fu
Residual 1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
Residual 2
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
Residual 3
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
Residual 4
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
Residual 5
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
Residual 6
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
Table 5.2: Residual to fault sensitivity
From that, a fault can be isolated by detecting the residuals reacting and matching the
signatures.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
49
==PAGE:58==
5.1.1
Effect of Qi
Given that the equation for the leakage Qi has such a large impact in the isolability of the
different faults considered, the effect of different values of the leakage is presented. The
parameter that is changed is Cli, which is proportional to the computation off the leakage
Qi itself.
First of all, the model is considered as a whole, meaning that all four operational cases are
considered, as presented in the base model. A total of 92 residuals are generated. From
those residuals, there is the leakage Qi and the parameter Cli appearing in three different
forms:
• Qi = Cli · (pp →pr) to compute the leakage
• pp = Qi
Cli + pr to compute the pressure pp
• pr = →Qi
Cli + pp to compute the pressure pr
It can be seen that the computation of pp and pr has the parameter Cli in the denominator,
which would like to an infinite pressure when Cli = 0, which would be the consideration
when the internal leakage Qi = 0. Is with those equations to compute the pressures when
the additional isolability properties are obtained.
Due to the fact that the leakage is a parameter with an unknown value and uncertainty,
that can also vary with time due to degradation of components, a study is performed in
order to assess how does it affect the residuals that the parameter Cli is different in the
computation of the residuals and the actual value of the residual. The study consists on
using an static value of Cli = 2 · 10−12, which is the assumed nominal value. From that, a
residual with each of the forms of Qi and Cli involves in the calculations is use to assess
how the residual is affected by those parameters and differences in values.
Table 5.3: Metrics simulation for different Cli values, residual computation at Cli = 2 ·
10−12.
Cli
Residual A - with Qi = Cli · (pp →pr)
Residual B - with pp = Qi
Cli + pr
Residual C - with pr = →Qi
Cli + pp
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
0
0.00e+00
2.04e-02
-3.69e-04
4.11e-03
0.00e+00
8.88e+01
-1.75e-03
1.86e+01
0.00e+00
2.30e+13
4.99e+11
4.11e+12
1e →13
0.00e+00
2.04e-02
-3.70e-04
4.11e-03
0.00e+00
8.88e+01
-1.76e-03
1.87e+01
0.00e+00
2.30e+13
4.99e+11
4.11e+12
1e →12
0.00e+00
2.01e-02
-2.57e-04
4.10e-03
0.00e+00
8.90e+01
-1.82e-03
1.87e+01
0.00e+00
2.30e+13
4.99e+11
4.11e+12
2e →12
0.00e+00
1.98e-02
-1.78e-04
4.10e-03
0.00e+00
8.92e+01
-1.85e-03
1.87e+01
0.00e+00
2.30e+13
5.00e+11
4.11e+12
7e →11
0.00e+00
2.01e-02
-3.05e-04
4.12e-03
0.00e+00
9.13e+01
-3.59e-03
1.90e+01
0.00e+00
2.35e+13
5.51e+11
4.17e+12
1e →10
0.00e+00
2.02e-02
-4.30e-04
4.12e-03
0.00e+00
9.08e+01
-4.79e-03
1.90e+01
0.00e+00
2.35e+13
5.73e+11
4.19e+12
It can be seen in Table 5.3 how the fact that there is the model mismatch affect the average
values of the residuals. Notice that the scenario used is the healthy scenario, it would be
expected that the residual is, ideally, zero. It can be seen that, the for all residuals A,
B and C the mean value is increased as the leakage is larger. It can be seen that the
standard deviation of the residuals remains within the same order of magnitude.
A second study realized is having the Cli matching between the simulation and the one
used. The results obtained are presented in the following table:
50
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.4: Metrics simulation for different Cli values in simulation.
Cli
Residual A - with Qi = Cli · (pp →pr)
Residual B - with pp = Qi
Cli + pr
Residual C - with pr = →Qi
Cli + pp
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
min |r|
max |r|
mean (r)
std (r)
0
0.00e+00
1.97e-02
4.03e-07
4.09e-03
Inf
Inf
Inf
NaN
Inf
Inf
NaN
NaN
1e →13
0.00e+00
1.97e-02
-1.88e-05
4.08e-03
0.00e+00
1.76e+03
-3.63e-02
3.69e+02
0.00e+00
4.55e+14
9.95e+12
8.15e+13
1e →12
0.00e+00
1.99e-02
-1.33e-04
4.09e-03
0.00e+00
1.76e+02
-3.63e-03
3.70e+01
0.00e+00
4.56e+13
9.92e+11
8.15e+12
2e →12
0.00e+00
1.98e-02
-1.80e-04
4.10e-03
0.00e+00
8.83e+01
-1.83e-03
1.85e+01
0.00e+00
2.28e+13
4.95e+11
4.07e+12
7e →11
0.00e+00
4.35e-02
-3.21e-04
5.05e-03
0.00e+00
2.58e+00
-3.30e-04
5.36e-01
0.00e+00
6.57e+11
1.15e+10
1.15e+11
1e →10
0.00e+00
4.87e-02
-3.48e-04
5.28e-03
0.00e+00
1.80e+00
-3.74e-04
3.75e-01
0.00e+00
4.58e+11
7.28e+09
8.03e+10
It can be seen in Table 5.4 that for residuals B and C, the residual takes an infinite
value due to the computation of pp and pr having a zero in the denominator. On the
other hand, residual A does not present that effect, and it does not become an infinity
or undetermined computation. It can also be seen that in this case the mean value of
the residuals does increase with the value of the leakage for residual A, but decreases
for B and C. That is due to the fact that the pressures computed form the expression
with Cli decreases it absolute value when the leakage is larger, which the enters directly
the computations for the residual, affecting its value. The response of the residuals C is
presented in Figure 5.1. It can be seen how the shape of the residuals is the same, but the
magnitudes are different as a product of the numerical effect fo having a large or smaller
value of Cli in the computations of the residual.
Figure 5.1: Overlay of Residual C for the different Cli value
5.1.2
Detectability and Isolability
In order to test that the residuals provide the isolability properties obtained in 4.4, a set of
6 residuals providing the sensitivity properties presented in Table 5.2 is implemented. The
six residuals have been implemented in the Matlab functions presented in A.1.2. Then, all
nine scenarios defined previously are simulated and all the residuals evaluated. The GLR
algorithm presented previously in subsection 4.4.1 is applied to the residuals.
The results obtained when using the residuals for fault detection and isolation in the
previously defined scenarios are presented in 5.5.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
51
==PAGE:60==
Scenario
Detection Time (s)
Global
Isolated
Expected
Check
1
2
3
4
5
6
Fault
Fault
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
✓
2
-
65.00
65.00
65.00
-
65.00
65.00
fm,β
fm,β
✓
3
-
65.00
65.00
65.00
-
65.00
65.00
fm,β
fm,β
✓
4
-
65.00
65.00
-
65.02
65.32
65.32
fm,pp
fm,pp
✓
5
-
91.72
-
65.00
65.00
65.00
91.72
fm,pr
fm,pr
✓
6
65.00
-
-
-
-
-
65.00
fm,ps
fm,ps
✓
7
-
65.22
65.22
108.42
65.36
120.88
120.88
fu
fpp
-
8
-
122.56
123.86
67.62
65.46
67.62
123.86
fu
fpr
-
9
-
65.00
65.00
69.46
70.00
69.48
70.00
fu
fu
✓
Table 5.5: Detection results for the simulated scenarios.
✓indicates that the expected fault on the scenario is successfully isolated
The plots with all the scenarios and residuals can be found in Appendix A.2.
Table 5.5 presents the results of the detection and isolation of the present faults in each
of the scenarios. The detection time is defined as the first time the GLR is evaluated
above the thresholds. In the table, when no detection time is presented, indicates that
the residual does not react with a value larger than the thresholds presented 4.2. No false
alarms are detected.
For all the nine scenarios presented, seven of them got correctly isolated faults. On the
case per scenarios 7 and 8, the faults are miss-isolated as if those where faults on the input
u. That is due to the fact that faults fpp and fpr, i.e. the process faults, are introduced
as leakages. The fact that the computation of the leakages makes usage of the pressures,
and then those leakages are used into the computation for the dynamics of the pressure
˙pp and ˙pr, then the system behaves as if there where two faults at the same time. That
results into a miss-isolation of the fault, but still the set of residuals is able to identify
that there is something not operating under nominal conditions.
Lastly, it can be seen that the detection time is different on the residuals depending on
the fault present. That is due to the fact that some faults are more aggressive, such as a
bias, which behaves as a step, compared to a gain fault.
5.2
Evaluation of the Observers Designed
In order to asses the different observers presented, this section presents a graphical rep-
resentation of the response of the observers. Moreover, different metrics are presented in
order to numerically quantify the difference between the observers. The metrics provided
are:
• min |e| as the minimum value of the absolute value of the error.
• max |e| as the maximum value of the absolute value of the error.
• avg(e) as the average value of the absolute value of the error.
• std(e) as the standard deviation of the error. Larger
• Integral Square Error (ISE). Metric to asses how much of the square of the error
is accumulated over time. Large values will indicate that the observed value does
deviate from the real value.
52
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:61==
• Integral Error (IE). Metric to asses how much error is accumulated over time. If the
error has a positive or negative bias the IE will be larger positive or negative value.
Two scenarios are used in order to asses the observers. The first one is Scenario 1, where
the system operates under nominal conditions. The error is computed as the difference
between the ”real” value of the pitch angle βreal, which is extracted form the simulation,
and the value obtained from the observers ˆβ.
Figure 5.2: Behaviour of the observers when the system is under nominal conditions
Figure 5.2 presents the response of the three different observers. It can be seen how under
nominal conditions all three observers are able to track the real value of the pitch angle
β.
Observer
min |e|
max |e|
avg(e)
std(e)
ISE
IE
Lueremberg Nominal
0.0000
0.1458
-0.0000
0.0008
0.0001
-0.0007
Alg. + Correction Nominal
0.0000
0.0065
0.0027
0.0020
0.0023
0.5420
EKF Nominal
0.0000
0.0221
0.0001
0.0008
0.0001
0.0202
Table 5.6: Observer behaviour under nominal operation conditions (Scenario 1)
Table 5.6 presents the metrics introduce above for the observers operating under the
nominal system, i.e. without any faults. It can be see that over time the Lueremberg and
EKF are the observers that accumulate less error. On the other hand, the algebraic with
correction terms presents a smaller max of the absolute value. That is due to the transient
that the Lueremberg and EKF present.
The second scenario used is Scenario 3, where the measurement of the pitch angle presents
a bias from second 60.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.3: Behaviour of the observers when the system is under a fault on the pitch angle
β measurement (Scenario 3)
Figure 5.3 present the response of the different observers. In this case it can be seen that
the Lueremberg observer is not able to track the real pitch angle when the fault on the
system is introduced, due to the fact that the measurement is faulty.
Observer
min |e|
max |e|
avg(e)
std(e)
ISE
IE
Lueremberg
0.0000
0.1510
-0.0840
0.0549
2.0161
→16.8008
Alg. + Correction
0.0000
0.0064
0.0024
0.0018
0.0019
0.4899
EKF
0.0000
0.0221
0.0001
0.0007
0.0001
0.0256
Table 5.7: Observer behaviour fault in pitch angle β sensor (Scenario 3)
Table 5.7 presents the metrics for the faulty scenario.
As expected, the Lueremberg
presents worse values due to the estimation being affected by the bias from second 60. On
the other hand, the values for the Algebraic with Correction and the EKF are around the
same values obtained in the previous scenario. That shows that those two observer are
insensible to a fault on the measurement of the pitch angle.
5.2.1
Effect of Model Mismatch
An additional aspect to take into account on the design of observers is the effect of model
mismatch on the estimated value. To asses the effect that model mismatches can have
on the observer designed, a additional scenario with a 1% increase in the internal leakage
used for the observers computations. The value Cli = 2 · 10−12 becomes Cli,mismatch =
2.02 · 10−12. On that scenario, the estimate ˆβ is computed. The metrics for the estimated
value compared to the real value are presented in the following table.
Observer
min |e|
max |e|
avg(e)
std(e)
ISE
IE
Lueremberg
0.0000
0.1458
-0.0000
0.0008
0.0001
-0.0007
Alg. + Correction
0.0000
0.0074
0.0034
0.0019
0.0030
0.6733
EKF
0.0000
0.0223
0.0004
0.0008
0.0002
0.0862
Table 5.8: Observer behaviour with a model mismatch of +1% of Cli
54
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:63==
In order to compare with those values with the values under the nominal case Table 5.6,
where the difference is compared as: variation = mismatch →nominal.
Observer
min |e|
max |e|
avg(e)
std(e)
ISE
IE
Lueremberg (diff)
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Alg. + Correction (diff)
0.0000
0.0009
0.0007
-0.0001
0.0007
0.1313
EKF (diff)
0.0000
0.0002
0.0003
0.0001
0.0001
0.0660
Table 5.9: Comparison between the nominal model and a model with a mismatched Cli
of 1% as variation = mismatch →nominal
In Table 5.8 it can be seen that the EKF presents the smallest ISE and IE, when there is a
model mismatch, with the exception of the Lueremberg Observer but, as presented before,
that observer is tolerant to β measurement. Moreover, Table 5.9 presents the difference
between the nominal and the mismatched model. It can be seen that the EKF is the one
with the smallest difference in IE and ISE, indicating that it is less affected by model
mismatches. Must be noticed again that the Lueremberg Observer is not considered due
to its dependence to the β measurement.
As a final note, the results for the algebraic observer without the correction values are
omitted on this comparison due to the fact that it is already known that it is not meant
to handle any sort of model mismatch. It does not have any sort of correction mechanism
when the system deviates from the nominal case in all of its parameter.
5.3
Fault Accommodation Using Residuals
In the scope of the project, driving adaptations is seen as changing the control action
when the system is affected by a fault in order to mitigate the effect of that fault. As
mentioned previously, the scope of the project covers the handling of a fault in the pitch
angle β measurement, as it is one of the most critical faults. The reason for a fault on
the pitch measurement for being the most important is because the controller uses the
measurement of the pitch angle to track it. When that measurement is wrong, the value
being tracked is also wrong.
In order to test the implementation the block diagram presented in Figure 4.13 is imple-
mented in Matlab - Simulink. The observer utilized is the observer based on EKF due to
it being the one with the best performance metrics, as presented in the section above. The
trigger of the detection and isolation of the fault is triggered after 5 seconds, matching the
isolation time for a bias in the beta measurement presented in Table 5.5.
With that, the Scenario 3 where the measurement of the pitch angle β has a bias of 0.12 rad
is used to test the approach. In order to assess the results obtained, the difference between
the reference that the pitch angle β needs to track and the actual value of the pitch angle is
used. From that, as per the assessment of the observers, the min, max, average, standard
deviation, ISE and IE of the error are obtained. Four different simulations are utilized in
order to assess the implementation. Those are:
• Healthy where the system behaves in nominal conditions. No fault is applied
• No Controller Switch + βm Bias as the Scenario 3 where the controller always uses
the measurement of β to compute the tracking error.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
55
==PAGE:64==
• Hard Controller Switch + βm Bias as the Scenario 3 where the controller switches
from the use of the measurement of β to the observer when the fault is detected.
• Anti-windup Controller Switch + βm Bias as the Scenario 3 where the controller
implemented is the anti-windup version designed in Chapter 4.
The results obtained in the simulation are presented in Table 5.10.
Scenario
min |e|
max |e|
avg(e)
std(e)
ISE
IE
Healthy
0.0000
0.0037
0.0000
0.0009
0.0002
−0.0003
No Controller Switch + βm Bias
0.0000
0.1480
0.0933
0.0502
2.0207
16.7998
Hard Controller Switch + βm Bias
0.0000
0.2794
0.0000
0.0327
0.1927
−0.0054
Anti-windup Controller Switch + βm Bias
0.0000
0.1480
0.0034
0.0210
0.0816
0.6112
Table 5.10: Metrics on the error e = βreal →βref
It can be seen in Table 5.10 that, the Healthy scenario is the one with the least error
overall. From that, it can be seen that, when the system is controlled with a controller
using a faulty measurement, i.e. not switching the operation when the fault on the pitch
angle is triggered, the error in the tracking increases. On the other hand, it can be seen
that when there is the switch action triggered on a fault in the pitch angle, the error does
not increase the same amount. The metric showing this effect are the ISE and IE, where
the component of integrating over time takes into account that the error is present.
Figure 5.4 presents the value of the real pitch angle obtained in each of the scenarios
presented for the assessment of the controller. It can be seen how both switched controller
are able to bring the real reference. Must be noticed that when the anti-windup switch in
the controller action is used, there is no overshoot of the pitch angle. On the other hand,
the raw switch controller with no anti-windup does presents and overshoot of 0.27 rad,
which represents a 52% of overshoot. As a last note, the settling time after the controller
switches to use the observer value of ˆβ until β reaches a 99% of the reference value to
track is 6.2 s.
Figure 5.4: Overlay of the different scenarios to asses the controller action
56
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:65==
With that, it can be seen that the designed implementation is able to adapt the control
action when a fault in the pitch angle is present, so that the pitch angle of the system
does track the desired reference.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
57
==PAGE:66==
6
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion about the interpretation in of the results presented in
the previous chapter.
Firstly, the model presented by the work in [8] is utilized and the isolability properties
presented are verified. An important outcome is that due to the structure and equations
defining the system, the isolability properties are affected depending on the operational
region the hydraulic pitch system is operating at every point in time.
A secondary outcome of the analysis of the properties of the system is the effect that the
leakage Qi has on the system. It has been found that the equation Qi = Cli · (pp →pr) has
a critical role in the isolability properties of the process and pressure measurement faults.
That is due to the fact that the equations allows an additional path in the computation of
the pressure, which can then be use to compare, e.g. the measured value of the pressures
to the computed. From the analysis provided in 5.1.1, it is also relevant to mention that
the shape and magnitude of the residual is dependant on the value of the leakage. That
can become a challenge due to the fact that the parameter Cli for the leakage is unknown
in the real wind turbine’s hydraulic pitch system. A solution for that manner is to force a
known leakage between chambers in the cylinder. Based on the results presented on the
effect of Cli is would be preferable that the value Cli is in the range 2·10−12 to 7·10−11 so
for the residuals using Cli in the denominator the noise would be less amplified. Also on the
outcome of the study of the properties of the system, must be noticed that the isolability
properties of the system depend on the operational regions presented in Figure 4.5. In
practice, as has been presented in the results chapter, the system is able to isolate the
faults considering the system as a whole due to the fact that the system is not constantly in
a single operational region, because it changes continuously. The operational case switches
do provided spikes and non-constant-zero residuals, as can be seen in the plots presented
in Appendix A.2, but with the appropriate threshold selected the residuals can be used
for detection and isolation. From that, the fact that the system has different operational
regions due to the representation of the system with the non-linearities, must be taken
into account to analyse the system and provide the correct understanding of the behaviour
of it, but on this case it can be handled with residuals generated from the residuals as a
whole.
Moreover, it has been proven that the set of residuals chosen are able to detect and isolate
faults in the different sensors available in the system and the input. On the other hand,
the fault on the process Qp and Qr cannot be correctly isolated, but are miss-isolated as
input faults. The main reason for the fault in Qp and Qr to not be correctly isolated is due
to the fact that the equations for the flows are coupled with the pressures, the dynamics
of which are also coupled to the flows. From that, a fault in any of the flows would be the
same as having two fault at the same time, which the detection and isolation mechanism
does not take into account. It handles single faults at the same time. In regard to the
detection times, it is presented in Table 5.5 that for the process faults the detection time
is delayed between 40 and 50 seconds from the fault time (t = 60s). That can be also
attributed to the fact that the process faults introduced behave as multiple faults at the
same time, which the triggers different dynamics and response magnitudes in the residuals,
leading to a rather large delay. On the other hand, the faults for the pressure and pitch
measurements, and the input fault are bounded to less than 63.86 seconds from the fault
time.
58
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:67==
For the sensor faults, specially the detection pitch angle sensor β, the detection time is 5
seconds after the fault is present. That isolation time matches the fact that the residuals
are decimated to the 20th sample, leading to a window size that involves 5 seconds of
residuals information being evaluated. That leads to the residuals detecting the fault in
the beta measurement as fast as it could possibly be. That is mostly to the fact that the
faults in the β measurement chosen for the scenarios have the shape of a step change at
the fault time. That is also reflected as a step change in the residuals used, but the GLR
requires more time to present that change in value.
Out of the 8 faulty scenarios, 6 have a correct fault isolation in less than 21 seconds (5.5),
which compounds a success rate of 75% after the first 21 seconds of a faults being present.
Moreover, 5 of those faulty scenarios obtained a successfully isolated fault after the first 10
seconds. That becomes a success rate of 62.5% after the 10 seconds mark. Those results
indicate that the solution designed would be able to isolated faults and trigger the switch
on the controller. The response would be faster for faults on the pitch angle measurement,
but it would still be possible to, within a minute isolate any fault in the system.
In regard to some studies presented in the literature review, like [16], the solution does
provide slower detection times than the obtained by that study, but it also needs to be
taken into account that the model used includes a larger amount of non-linearities that
make analysis and generation of residuals challenging. The fact that there is switches in
the operation of the valve generates dynamics in the residuals that, in order to avoid, a
larger windows size is used, which together with the decimation introduces a delay in the
detection. That is trade-off that has to be tuned in order to avoid false alarms. For the
scope of the project, it has been deemed more relevant that the avoid large dynamics on
the residuals, and setting larger thresholds in order to avoid false alarms and achieve the
desired isolability, specially of the faults in the pitch angle measurement.
Overall, the residual set designed is able to detect and isolate the most relevant fault for
the scope of the project. That is the fault in the pitch angle.
In regard to the observers, and for the case presented in the thesis, the Kalman filter
implemented uses the whole model and linearized at every point in time. In the scope
of the project it has also been include a comparison between the different observers im-
plemented. The observer based on the well known Lueremberg Observer does have the
best performance when the system operates under nominal conditions, but it not robust
to fault in the pitch system. That is mainly due to the fact that the Lueremberg Observer
used the measurement on the pitch angle β to perform corrections between the estimate
and the real value. As per the other two observer designed, the Algebraic with Correction
Terms and the Extended Kalman Filter, both are able to estimate the value of the pitch
angle when there is a fault in that measurement. The best performance when comparing
the estimate of the pitch angle with the real value of the pitch angle is obtained with the
Extended Kalman Filter, as presented in Table5.6, 5.7, 5.8 and 5.8, where it does obtain
a better tracking that the Algebraic with Correction Terms. That also holds when the
system presents some sort of model mismatch, as the one presented in Section 5.2.1. With
that, the best observer for the purpose of estimating the pitch angle of the system when
there is a fault in the measurement in the pitch angle is the Extended Kalman Filter.
It must be noticed that the estimation only works when the system is healthy or under
a fault on the pitch angle measurement. If there is other faults present such as process
faults or faults on the measurements of the pressure sensors, the estimate would drift from
the real value. That brings to the use of the observers and residuals to drive adaptation
in the hydraulic pitch system.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
59
==PAGE:68==
As mentioned, in the context of the thesis the driving of adaptation is defined as the
accommodation of the control action based on the presence of a fault in the pitch system.
The approach is only able to handle the faults on the pitch angle.
The adaptation of the control action is implemented with the anti-windup scheme. That
allows the system to switch the controller based on the detection and isolation of a fault in
the pitch angle measurement. When the signal indicating that the system is able to detect
and isolate a fault in the pitch angle, the control action is switched to, instead of using
the measurement (faulty) use the value obtained by the observer. The use of the switch
controller with anti-windup allows to switch the controller driving the value of the pitch
angle to track the reference in smooth way. As presented in Figure 5.4, it is noticeable
the effect that the anti-wind-up has in regard to the overshoot that the pitch angle takes
after the fault is isolated and the switch of the controller is triggered, specially compared
to the raw switch in the control action. In regard to the results presented in Table 5.10, it
must be noticed that the integral for the error IE is smaller in the Hard Controller Switch
than the Anti-windup controller switch. That is due to the fact that, on the hard switch,
the value of the pitch angle first tracks the wrong measurement, with a negative bias, and
then has a large overshoot deviating on the positive direction from the real value to track.
On the other hand, in regard to the integral of the squared error ISE, the Hard Controller
Switch does present a larger error compared to the Anti-windup controller switch, showing
that it does track the reference with less error over time.
Overall, the residuals and observers implemented are able to be integrated together with a
switched controller with an anti-windup block in order to handle faults in the pitch angle
measurement. That allows the system to be able to continue to track the desired reference,
even when there is a sensor fault in the value that needs to be tracked.
60
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
The thesis has had its main focus an hydraulic pitch system for a wind turbines. During
the project, different approaches and methods have been applied to tackle the handling of
faults in the wind turbine pitch system. The goals of the thesis have been defined to use
of residuals in order to detect and isolate a series of faults, and use those detections and
isolation to drive adaptation and accommodate faults.
The main targeted fault has been sensor faults in the pitch measurement angle. The reason
to select that fault, as discussed in the thesis, was the fact that if that sensor was faulty,
the controller would take that measurement and track the wrong value, ending with an
incorrect real pitch angle.
The work developed in the thesis has included the definition of residuals, use those residuals
to adapt faults in the pitch angle with a switched controller implemented with an anti-
windup. Working with the design of that solution has provide a great amount of insights on
how it the hydraulic pitch system modelled, what areas are sensitive, such as the leakage,
how residuals are generated and processed in order to obtain meaningful signals useful for
detection and isolation, and lastly how to apply those signals to a controller in order to
accommodate faults.
Overall, the methods, frameworks and theory applied have contributed to the acquisition
of valuable knowledge related to fault tolerant control for a pitch system. It has allowed
exploration, in simulation, of the application of different approaches to tackle the given
problem, providing the presented final solution. The final solution suggested that the best
approach to adapt the control action to a fault in the pitch system is to use an Extended
Kalman Filter to estimate the value of pitch angle β independently from the measurement
of β, allowing for an estimate not affected by sensor faults. That estimate is the used to
feed the controller and compute the tracking error when a fault in the measurement of β
is detected and isolated.
Overall, the application of fault tolerant control has successfully handled faults in the pitch
system. To conclude, the scope defined at the beginning of the thesis, which matches the
goals of the project, have been met.
7.1
Future Work
In regard to the future work, it could be relevant to design observers for every measurement
sensible to faults, i.e. the faults, or different process variables. That would allow the
implementation of a variety of robust controllers which could need fault-free estimate of,
e.g. the pressures in the piston.
In regard to the residuals, a path for future work could be to continue to explore how
different parameters in the model affect the residuals and its reactions. It could also be
interesting to assess if the detection time of the residuals can be reduced by studying the
distribution followed by the residuals. And lastly, tackle more faults and studying the
isolability properties.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
61
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
Abdullah F. Al-Aboosi et al. “Low Carbon Methanol Production through Electri-
fication and Decarbonization”. In: Gas Science and Engineering 136 (Apr.-2025),
p. 205562. issn: 2949-9089. doi: 10.1016/j.jgsce.2025.205562. (accessed on 29-June-
2025).
[2]
Li Li et al. “Review and Outlook on the International Renewable Energy Devel-
opment”. In: Energy and Built Environment 3.2 (Apr.-2022), pp. 139–157. issn:
2666-1233. doi: 10.1016/j.enbenv.2020.12.002. (accessed on 29-June-2025).
[3]
Qusay Hassan et al. “A Comprehensive Review of International Renewable Energy
Growth”. In: Energy and Built Environment (Jan.-2024). issn: 2666-1233. doi: 10.
1016/j.enbenv.2023.12.002. (accessed on 29-June-2025).
[4]
Yuankui Wang et al. “Overview of Condition Monitoring Technology for Variable-
Speed Offshore Wind Turbines”. In: ENERGIES 18.5 (Mar.-2025), p. 1026. issn:
1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en18051026. (accessed on 29-June-2025).
[5]
Lu Wei, Zheng Qian, and Hamidreza Zareipour. “Wind Turbine Pitch System Con-
dition Monitoring and Fault Detection Based on Optimized Relevance Vector Ma-
chine Regression”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 11.4 (Oct.-2020),
pp. 2326–2336. issn: 1949-3037. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2019.2954834. (accessed on 28-
June-2025).
[6]
Nejad Alagha et al. “Artificial Intelligence in Wind Turbine Fault Detection and
Diagnosis: Advances and Perspectives”. In: Energies 18.7 (Jan.-2025), p. 1680. issn:
1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en18071680. (accessed on 29-June-2025).
[7]
Jianyu Lan et al. “A Review of Fault Diagnosis and Prediction Methods for Wind
Turbine Pitch Systems”. In: International Journal of Green Energy 21.7 (May-2024),
pp. 1613–1640. issn: 1543-5075. doi: 10.1080/15435075.2023.2253896. (accessed
on 24-June-2025).
[8]
Alessio Dallabona et al. “Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis Capabilities for Wind Tur-
bine Hydraulic Pitch Systems”. In: Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 224
(Feb.-2025), p. 111941. issn: 0888-3270. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2024.111941. (accessed
on 14-June-2025).
[9]
Afef Fekih, Hamed Habibi, and Silvio Simani. “Fault Diagnosis and Fault Tolerant
Control of Wind Turbines: An Overview”. In: ENERGIES 15.19 (Oct.-2022), p. 7186.
issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en15197186. (accessed on 24-June-2025).
[10]
Rui Ma et al. “An Online Learning Model Residual Method for Force Control of
Hydraulic Driven Joint”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 285 (Aug.-2025),
p. 127757. issn: 0957-4174. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2025.127757. (accessed on 17-
June-2025).
[11]
Rui Liu and Andrew Alleyne. “Nonlinear Force/Pressure Tracking of an Electro-
Hydraulic Actuator”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes. 14th IFAC World Congress
1999, Beijing, Chia, 5-9 July 32.2 (July-1999), pp. 952–957. issn: 1474-6670. doi:
10.1016/S1474-6670(17)56160-1. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[12]
Ravi Kumar Pandit, Davide Astolfi, and Isidro Durazo Cardenas. “A Review of
Predictive Techniques Used to Support Decision Making for Maintenance Operations
of Wind Turbines”. In: Energies 16.4 (Jan.-2023), p. 1654. issn: 1996-1073. doi:
10.3390/en16041654. (accessed on 17-June-2025).
62
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:71==
[13]
Bindi Chen, Peter C. Matthews, and Peter J. Tavner. “Automated On-line Fault
Prognosis for Wind Turbine Pitch Systems Using Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition”. In: IET Renewable Power Generation 9.5 (July-2015), pp. 503–513.
issn: 1752-1416, 1752-1424. doi: 10.1049/iet-rpg.2014.0181. (accessed on 28-June-
2025).
[14]
Shen Yin, Guang Wang, and Hamid Reza Karimi. “Data-Driven Design of Robust
Fault Detection System for Wind Turbines”. In: Mechatronics. Vibration Control
Systems 24.4 (June-2014), pp. 298–306. issn: 0957-4158. doi: 10.1016/j.mechatronics.
2013.11.009. (accessed on 17-June-2025).
[15]
Hamed Badihi et al. “A Comprehensive Review on Signal-Based and Model-Based
Condition Monitoring of Wind Turbines: Fault Diagnosis and Lifetime Prognosis”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE 110.6 (June-2022), pp. 754–806. issn: 1558-2256. doi:
10.1109/JPROC.2022.3171691. (accessed on 5-June-2025).
[16]
Seongpil Cho, Zhen Gao, and Torgeir Moan. “Model-Based Fault Detection, Fault
Isolation and Fault-Tolerant Control of a Blade Pitch System in Floating Wind
Turbines”. In: Renewable Energy 120 (May-2018), pp. 306–321. issn: 0960-1481. doi:
10.1016/j.renene.2017.12.102. (accessed on 11-Sept.-2025).
[17]
Seyedeh Hamideh Sedigh Ziyabari, Mahdi Aliyari Shoorehdeli, and Madjid Karim-
irad. “Robust Fault Estimation of a Blade Pitch and Drivetrain System in Wind
Turbine Model”. In: Journal of Vibration and Control 27.3-4 (Feb.-2021), pp. 277–
294. issn: 1077-5463. doi: 10.1177/1077546320926274. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[18]
Vicente Borja-Jaimes et al. “Sliding Mode Observer-Based Fault Detection and Iso-
lation Approach for a Wind Turbine Benchmark”. In: Processes 10.1 (Jan.-2022),
p. 54. issn: 2227-9717. doi: 10.3390/pr10010054. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[19]
P. Garimella and Bin Yao. “Model Based Fault Detection of an Electro-Hydraulic
Cylinder”. In: Proceedings of the 2005, American Control Conference, 2005. June-
2005, 484–489 vol. 1. doi: 10.1109/ACC.2005.1469982. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[20]
Fengming Shi and Ron J Patton. “A Robust Adaptive Approach to Wind Turbine
Pitch Actuator Component Fault Estimation”. In: 2014 UKACC International Con-
ference on Control (CONTROL). July-2014, pp. 468–473. doi: 10.1109/CONTROL.
2014.6915185. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[21]
Junjie Zhang et al. “Fault Estimation and Fault-Tolerant Control of Multiple Faults
and Uncertain Disturbances Based on Generalized Sliding Mode Method”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control 35.4 (2025), pp. 1368–1378. issn:
1099-1239. doi: 10.1002/rnc.7719. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[22]
Yanhua Liu, Ron J. Patton, and Jianglin Lan. “Fault-Tolerant Individual Pitch Con-
trol Using Adaptive Sliding Mode Observer”. In: IFAC PAPERSONLINE. Vol. 51.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2018, pp. 1127–1132. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.09.723. (ac-
cessed on 28-June-2025).
[23]
Fernando E. Serrano, Vicenc Puig, and Marco A. Flores. “Integral Sliding-Mode
Fault-tolerant Pitch Control of Wind Turbines”. In: IFAC PAPERSONLINE. Vol. 56.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2023, pp. 3516–3521. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2023.10.1507.
(accessed on 28-June-2025).
[24]
Aron Pujana-Arrese et al. “Wind Turbine Control Adaptation to Pitch System
Faults”. In: Results in Engineering 27 (Sept.-2025), p. 105671. issn: 2590-1230. doi:
10.1016/j.rineng.2025.105671. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[25]
Kai-Yu Hu, Chunxia Yang, and Wenjing Sun. “Adaptive Sliding Mode Fault Com-
pensation for Sensor Faults of Variable Structure Hypersonic Vehicle”. In: Sensors
22.4 (Jan.-2022), p. 1523. issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s22041523. (accessed on 24-
June-2025).
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
63
==PAGE:72==
[26]
Wen Chen et al. “Robust Fault Detection of Turbofan Engines Subject to Adaptive
Controllers via a Total Measurable Fault Information Residual (ToMFIR) Tech-
nique”. In: ISA Transactions. ICCA 2013 53.5 (Sept.-2014), pp. 1383–1388. issn:
0019-0578. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2013.12.032. (accessed on 24-June-2025).
[27]
Xiangdi Kong et al. “Intelligent Diagnosis Method for Early Faults of Electric-
Hydraulic Control System Based on Residual Analysis”. In: Reliability Engineering
& System Safety 261 (Sept.-2025), p. 111142. issn: 0951-8320. doi: 10.1016/j.ress.
2025.111142. (accessed on 13-June-2025).
[28]
Rima Roubache et al. “NOVEL ACCURATE NANOSATELLITE ATTITUDE ES-
TIMATION AND CONTROL ARCHITECTURE BASED ON MAGNETIC DIPOLE
MOMENT AND ACTUATOR FAULT COMPENSATION”. In: REVUE ROUMAINE
DES SCIENCES TECHNIQUES — SÉRIE ÉLECTROTECHNIQUE ET ÉNERGÉ-
TIQUE 70.2 (June-2025), pp. 253–258. issn: 0035-4066. doi: 10.59277/RRST-EE.
2025.2.17. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[29]
Luciana B. Sollaci and Mauricio G. Pereira. “The Introduction, Methods, Results,
and Discussion (IMRAD) Structure: A Fifty-Year Survey”. In: Journal of the Medical
Library Association 92.3 (July-2004), pp. 364–371. issn: 1536-5050. (accessed on 19-
July-2025).
[30]
Alessio Dallabona, Mogens Blanke, and Dimitrios Papageorgiou. “Sensorless Friction
Estimation for Condition Monitoring of Wind Turbine Hydraulic Pitch System”. In:
Proceedings of the 5th IFAC Symposium on Systems, Structure and Control. Ayia
Napa, Cyprus: IFAC / Elsevier, 2025.
[31]
Mogens Blanke et al. Diagnosis and Fault-Tolerant Control. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016. isbn: 978-3-662-47943-8. doi: 10.1007/978- 3-
662-47943-8. (accessed on 26-Aug.-2025).
[32]
Erik Frisk, Mattias Krysander, and Daniel Jung. “A Toolbox for Analysis and Design
of Model Based Diagnosis Systems for Large Scale Models”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine.
20th IFAC World Congress 50.1 (July-2017), pp. 3287–3293. issn: 2405-8963. doi:
10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.504. (accessed on 13-June-2025).
[33]
Mattias Krysander, Jan Åslund, and Mattias Nyberg. “An Eﬀicient Algorithm for
Finding Minimal Overconstrained Subsystems for Model-Based Diagnosis”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans
38.1 (Jan.-2008), pp. 197–206. issn: 1558-2426. doi: 10.1109/TSMCA.2007.909555.
(accessed on 6-Aug.-2025).
[34]
D. Luenberger. “Observers for Multivariable Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control 11.2 (Apr.-1966), pp. 190–197. issn: 1558-2523. doi: 10.1109/
TAC.1966.1098323. (accessed on 9-Sept.-2025).
[35]
D. Luenberger. “An Introduction to Observers”. In: IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control 16.6 (Dec.-1971), pp. 596–602. issn: 1558-2523. doi: 10.1109/TAC.1971.
1099826. (accessed on 9-Sept.-2025).
[36]
Elbert Hendricks, Ole Jannerup, and Paul Haase Sørensen. Linear Systems Control:
Deterministic and Stochastic Methods. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. isbn: 978-
3-540-78485-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-78486-9.
[37]
Qiang Li et al. “Kalman Filter and Its Application”. In: 2015 8th International
Conference on Intelligent Networks and Intelligent Systems (ICINIS). Nov.-2015,
pp. 74–77. doi: 10.1109/ICINIS.2015.35. (accessed on 9-Sept.-2025).
[38]
Katsuhiko Ogata. Modern Control Engineering. Prentice Hall, 2010. isbn: 978-0-13-
615673-4. (accessed on 28-Aug.-2025).
[39]
C. S. Pedersen et al. Load and Leakage Estimation in Hydraulic Pitch System for
Wind Turbines. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology - Submitted.
64
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:73==
[40]
Alessio Dallabona, Mogens Blanke, and Dimitrios Papageorgiou. “Friction Estima-
tion for Condition Monitoring of Wind Turbine Hydraulic Pitch System”. In: IFAC
PAPERSONLINE. Vol. 58. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2024, pp. 598–603. doi: 10.1016/
j.ifacol.2024.07.284. (accessed on 28-June-2025).
[41]
Top Programming Languages 2024 - IEEE Spectrum. https://spectrum.ieee.org/top-
programming-languages-2024. (accessed on 11-Sept.-2025).
[42]
Daniel Pons Rotger. Model Based Fault Diagnosis for Wind Turbine Pitch System.
Tech. rep. Special Course, DTU. 2025.
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:75==
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A1
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
Residuals Used
A.1.1
Results used to obtain the effect of Qi and Cli
1
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
=
report_mtes_with_Qi_case_0_residual_match_f_p_p__f_p_r__f_m_betaa__f_m_p_p__f_u_1(z,
params, prev_state, Ts)
"→
"→
2
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_p, f_u
3
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
4
% Parameters
5
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
6
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
7
A_p = params.A_p;
8
A_r = params.A_r;
9
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
10
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
11
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
12
L_BE = params.L_BE;
13
L_AE = params.L_AE;
14
L_AB = params.L_AB;
15
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
16
K_vc = params.K_vc;
17
p_cv = params.p_cv;
18
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
19
p_t = params.p_t;
20
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
21
C_li = params.C_li;
22
23
% Known variables
24
y2 = z(2);
25
y4 = z(4);
26
u = z(5);
27
28
% Initialize state variables
29
p_r = prev_state(8);
30
p_p = prev_state(6);
31
Betaa = prev_state(3);
32
33
% Residual generator body
34
x_v = u; % e18
35
p_s = p_s0; % e19
36
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
37
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
38
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
39
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
40
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
41
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
42
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
43
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
44
dx_cyl = dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
45
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
46
Q_i = -(-Q_p*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*beta_eff_p*dx_cyl+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/beta_eff_p; % e1
47
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
A2
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:77==
48
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
49
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
50
dp_r = (beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r+A_r*dx_cyl))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)); % e2
51
52
r=Q_i-C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
53
54
% Update integrator variables
55
p_r = ApproxInt(dp_r,prev_state(8),Ts); % e29
56
57
% Update state variables
58
actual_state(8) = p_r;
59
actual_state(6) = p_p;
60
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
61
end
62
63
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
=
report_mtes_with_Qi_case_0_residual_match_f_p_p__f_p_r__f_m_betaa__f_m_p_r__f_u_4(z,
params, prev_state, Ts)
"→
"→
64
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_r, f_u
65
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
66
% Parameters
67
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
68
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
69
A_p = params.A_p;
70
A_r = params.A_r;
71
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
72
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
73
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
74
L_BE = params.L_BE;
75
L_AE = params.L_AE;
76
L_AB = params.L_AB;
77
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
78
K_vc = params.K_vc;
79
p_cv = params.p_cv;
80
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
81
p_t = params.p_t;
82
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
83
C_li = params.C_li;
84
85
% Known variables
86
y3 = z(3);
87
y4 = z(4);
88
u = z(5);
89
90
% Initialize state variables
91
p_r = prev_state(8);
92
Betaa = prev_state(3);
93
p_p = prev_state(6);
94
95
% Residual generator body
96
x_v = u; % e18
97
p_s = p_s0; % e19
98
p_r = z(3); % p_r measurement3; % e22
99
dp_r = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_r,prev_state(8),Ts, prev_state(9));
% e29
100
actual_state(9) = dp_r;
101
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
102
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
103
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A3
==PAGE:78==
104
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
105
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
106
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
107
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
108
dx_cyl = dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
109
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
110
Q_i = ((dp_r+(beta_eff_r*(Q_r-A_r*dx_cyl))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)))*(V_r0+A_r*(Cy ⌋
l_Stroke-x_cyl)))/beta_eff_r; %
e2
"→
"→
111
p_p = (Q_i+C_li*p_r)/C_li; % e7
112
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
113
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
114
Q_p = (Q_i*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*beta_eff_p*dx_cyl+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/beta_eff_p; % e1
115
116
r=Q_p+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x_ ⌋
v)-sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v( ⌋
x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
117
118
% Update state variables
119
actual_state(8) = p_r;
120
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
121
actual_state(6) = p_p;
122
end
123
124
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
=
report_mtes_with_Qi_case_0_residual_match_f_p_p__f_p_r__f_m_betaa__f_m_p_p__f_u_11(z,
params, prev_state, Ts)
"→
"→
125
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_p, f_u
126
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
127
% Parameters
128
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
129
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
130
A_p = params.A_p;
131
A_r = params.A_r;
132
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
133
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
134
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
135
L_BE = params.L_BE;
136
L_AE = params.L_AE;
137
L_AB = params.L_AB;
138
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
139
K_vc = params.K_vc;
140
p_cv = params.p_cv;
141
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
142
p_t = params.p_t;
143
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
144
C_li = params.C_li;
145
146
% Known variables
147
y2 = z(2);
148
y4 = z(4);
149
u = z(5);
150
151
% Initialize state variables
152
p_p = prev_state(6);
153
Betaa = prev_state(3);
154
p_r = prev_state(8);
155
156
% Residual generator body
A4
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:79==
157
x_v = u; % e18
158
p_s = p_s0; % e19
159
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
160
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
161
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
162
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
163
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
164
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
165
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
166
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
167
dx_cyl = dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
168
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
169
Q_i = -(-Q_p*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*beta_eff_p*dx_cyl+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/beta_eff_p; % e1
170
p_r = -(Q_i-C_li*p_p)/C_li; % e7
171
dp_r = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_r,prev_state(8),Ts, prev_state(9));
% e29
172
actual_state(9) = dp_r;
173
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
174
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
175
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
176
177
r=dp_r-(beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r+A_r*dx_cyl))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)); % e2
178
179
% Update state variables
180
actual_state(6) = p_p;
181
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
182
actual_state(8) = p_r;
183
end
A.1.2
Residuals used to obtain the Isolability Properties
1
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_1(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
2
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_m_p_s
3
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
4
% Parameters
5
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
6
7
% Known variables
8
y1 = z(1);
9
10
% Residual generator body
11
p_s = z(1); %
12
r=p_s-p_s0; % e19
13
end
14
15
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_2(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
16
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_p, f_m_p_r, f_u
17
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
18
% Parameters
19
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
20
A_p = params.A_p;
21
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
22
L_BE = params.L_BE;
23
L_AE = params.L_AE;
24
L_AB = params.L_AB;
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A5
==PAGE:80==
25
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
26
p_t = params.p_t;
27
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
28
C_li = params.C_li;
29
30
% Known variables
31
y2 = z(2);
32
y3 = z(3);
33
y4 = z(4);
34
u = z(5);
35
36
% Initialize state variables
37
p_p = prev_state(6);
38
Betaa = prev_state(3);
39
40
% Residual generator body
41
x_v = u; % e18
42
p_s = p_s0; % e19
43
p_r = z(3); % p_r measurement3; % e22
44
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
45
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
46
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
47
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
48
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
49
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
50
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
51
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
52
dx_cyl = dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
53
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
54
Q_i = -(-Q_p*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*beta_eff_p*dx_cyl+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/beta_eff_p; % e1
55
56
r=Q_i-C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
57
58
% Update state variables
59
actual_state(6) = p_p;
60
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
61
end
62
63
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_3(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
64
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_p, f_u
65
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
66
% Parameters
67
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
68
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
69
A_p = params.A_p;
70
A_r = params.A_r;
71
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
72
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
73
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
74
L_BE = params.L_BE;
75
L_AE = params.L_AE;
76
L_AB = params.L_AB;
77
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
78
K_vc = params.K_vc;
79
p_cv = params.p_cv;
80
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
A6
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:81==
81
p_t = params.p_t;
82
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
83
C_li = params.C_li;
84
85
% Known variables
86
y2 = z(2);
87
y4 = z(4);
88
u = z(5);
89
90
% Initialize state variables
91
p_r = prev_state(8);
92
p_p = prev_state(6);
93
Betaa = prev_state(3);
94
95
% Residual generator body
96
x_v = u; % e18
97
p_s = p_s0; % e19
98
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
99
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
100
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
101
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
102
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
103
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
104
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
105
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
106
dx_cyl = dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
107
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
108
Q_i = -(-Q_p*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*beta_eff_p*dx_cyl+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/beta_eff_p; % e1
109
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
110
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
111
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
112
dp_r = (beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r+A_r*dx_cyl))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)); % e2
113
114
r=Q_i-C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
115
116
% Update integrator variables
117
p_r = ApproxInt(dp_r,prev_state(8),Ts); % e29
118
119
% Update state variables
120
actual_state(8) = p_r;
121
actual_state(6) = p_p;
122
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
123
end
124
125
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_4(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
126
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
=
report_mtes_with_Qi_case_0_residual_match_f_p_p__f_p_r__f_m_betaa__f_m_p_r__f_u_13(z,
params, prev_state, Ts)
"→
"→
127
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_r, f_u
128
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
129
% Parameters
130
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
131
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
132
A_p = params.A_p;
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A7
==PAGE:82==
133
A_r = params.A_r;
134
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
135
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
136
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
137
L_BE = params.L_BE;
138
L_AE = params.L_AE;
139
L_AB = params.L_AB;
140
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
141
K_vc = params.K_vc;
142
p_cv = params.p_cv;
143
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
144
p_t = params.p_t;
145
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
146
C_li = params.C_li;
147
148
% Known variables
149
y3 = z(3);
150
y4 = z(4);
151
u = z(5);
152
153
% Initialize state variables
154
p_p = prev_state(6);
155
Betaa = prev_state(3);
156
p_r = prev_state(8);
157
158
% Residual generator body
159
x_v = u; % e18
160
p_s = p_s0; % e19
161
p_r = z(3); % p_r measurement3; % e22
162
dp_r = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_r,prev_state(8),Ts, prev_state(9));
% e29
163
actual_state(9) = dp_r;
164
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
165
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
166
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
167
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
168
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
169
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
170
Q_i = C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
171
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
172
dx_cyl = ((dp_r-(beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)))*(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_St ⌋
roke-x_cyl)))/(A_r*beta_eff_r); %
e2
"→
"→
173
dp_p = -(beta_eff_p*(Q_i-Q_p+A_p*dx_cyl))/(V_p0+A_p*x_cyl); % e1
174
dBetaa = dx_cyl/dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
175
176
r = Betaa-prev_state(3); % e27
177
178
% Update integrator variables
179
p_p = ApproxInt(dp_p,prev_state(6),Ts); % e28
180
Betaa = ApproxInt(dBetaa,prev_state(3),Ts); % e27
181
182
% Update state variables
183
actual_state(6) = p_p;
184
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
185
actual_state(8) = p_r;
A8
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:83==
186
end
187
188
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_5(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
189
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_p, f_p_r, f_m_p_p, f_m_p_r, f_u
190
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
191
% Parameters
192
beta_eff_p = params.beta_eff_p;
193
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
194
A_p = params.A_p;
195
A_r = params.A_r;
196
V_p0 = params.V_p0;
197
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
198
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
199
L_BE = params.L_BE;
200
L_AE = params.L_AE;
201
L_AB = params.L_AB;
202
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
203
K_vc = params.K_vc;
204
p_cv = params.p_cv;
205
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
206
p_t = params.p_t;
207
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
208
C_li = params.C_li;
209
210
% Known variables
211
y2 = z(2);
212
y3 = z(3);
213
u = z(5);
214
215
% Initialize state variables
216
p_r = prev_state(8);
217
Betaa = prev_state(3);
218
p_p = prev_state(6);
219
220
% Residual generator body
221
x_v = u; % e18
222
p_s = p_s0; % e19
223
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
224
dp_p = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_p,prev_state(6),Ts, prev_state(7));
% e28
225
actual_state(7) = dp_p;
226
Q_p = -sqrt(abs(p_p-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_s)*K_v_x_v(x_v)*heaviside_custom(x ⌋
_v)+sqrt(abs(p_p-p_t))*sign_function_custom(p_p-p_t)*heaviside_custom(-x_v)*K_v_x_v ⌋
(x_v); %
e3
"→
"→
"→
227
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
228
Q_i = C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
229
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
230
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
231
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
232
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
233
dx_cyl = -(Q_i*beta_eff_p-Q_p*beta_eff_p+V_p0*dp_p+A_p*dp_p*x_cyl)/(A_p*beta_eff_p); %
e1
"→
234
dBetaa = dx_cyl/dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
235
dp_r = (beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r+A_r*dx_cyl))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)); % e2
236
237
r=p_r-y3; % e22
238
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A9
==PAGE:84==
239
% Update integrator variables
240
p_r = ApproxInt(dp_r,prev_state(8),Ts); % e29
241
Betaa = ApproxInt(dBetaa,prev_state(3),Ts); % e27
242
243
% Update state variables
244
actual_state(8) = p_r;
245
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
246
actual_state(6) = p_p;
247
end
248
249
function [r, actual_state, delayed_term, live_term, op_case]
= residual_6(z, params,
prev_state, Ts)
"→
250
251
% Structurally sensitive to faults: f_p_r, f_m_betaa, f_m_p_p, f_m_p_r, f_u
252
actual_state = zeros(12, 1); % Initialize actual_state with zeros to keep for the next"
253
% Parameters
254
beta_eff_r = params.beta_eff_r;
255
A_r = params.A_r;
256
V_r0 = params.V_r0;
257
Cyl_Stroke = params.Cyl_Stroke;
258
L_BE = params.L_BE;
259
L_AE = params.L_AE;
260
L_AB = params.L_AB;
261
Phi_offset = params.Phi_offset;
262
K_vc = params.K_vc;
263
p_cv = params.p_cv;
264
phi_valve = params.phi_valve;
265
p_s0 = params.p_s0;
266
C_li = params.C_li;
267
268
% Known variables
269
y2 = z(2);
270
y3 = z(3);
271
y4 = z(4);
272
u = z(5);
273
274
% Initialize state variables
275
p_r = prev_state(8);
276
Betaa = prev_state(3);
277
278
% Residual generator body
279
x_v = u; % e18
280
p_s = p_s0; % e19
281
p_r = z(3); % p_r measurement3; % e22
282
dp_r = ApproxDiffAlpha(p_r,prev_state(8),Ts, prev_state(9));
% e29
283
actual_state(9) = dp_r;
284
Q_cv = -K_vc*heaviside_custom(-p_cv+p_r-p_s)*(p_cv-p_r+p_s); % e6
285
Q_rv = -phi_valve*sqrt(abs(p_r-p_s))*sign_function_custom(p_r-p_s)*heaviside_custom(-x_ ⌋
v)*K_v_x_v(x_v); %
e4
"→
"→
286
Q_r = Q_cv+Q_rv; % e8
287
p_p = z(2); % p_p measurement2; % e21
288
Q_i = C_li*(p_p-p_r); % e7
289
Betaa = z(4); % Betaa measurement4; % e23
290
dBetaa = ApproxDiffAlpha(Betaa,prev_state(3),Ts, prev_state(4));
% e27
291
actual_state(4) = dBetaa;
292
dx_c_dBetaa = L_AE*L_BE*sin(Betaa+Phi_offset)*1.0/sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Beta ⌋
a+Phi_offset)*2.0); %
e11
"→
"→
293
x_cyl = -L_AB+sqrt(L_AE^2+L_BE^2-L_AE*L_BE*cos(Betaa+Phi_offset)*2.0); % e10
A10
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:85==
294
dx_cyl = ((dp_r-(beta_eff_r*(Q_i-Q_r))/(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_Stroke-x_cyl)))*(V_r0+A_r*(Cyl_St ⌋
roke-x_cyl)))/(A_r*beta_eff_r); %
e2
"→
"→
295
296
r=dx_cyl-dBetaa*dx_c_dBetaa; % e12
297
298
% Update state variables
299
actual_state(8) = p_r;
300
actual_state(3) = Betaa;
301
end
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A11
==PAGE:86==
A12
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:87==
A.2
Residual Responses
Figure A.1: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 1
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A13
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.2: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 2
A14
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.3: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 3
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A15
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.4: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 4
A16
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.5: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 5
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A17
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.6: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 6
A18
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.7: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 7
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A19
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.8: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 8
A20
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.9: Residual Response, GLR and Detection for Scenario 9
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A21
==PAGE:96==
A.3
Source Code
The source code is provided in the code.zip file attached on the hand in.
A22
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
==PAGE:97==
Residual Based Adaptive Control and Estimation for Wind Turbines Pitch System
A23
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
