==PAGE:1==
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of
Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
Master Thesis
October, 2025
By
Cem Akarsubaşı
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has general mathematical and computer science literacy.
Cem Akarsubaşı - s232840
Signature
Date
ii
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
2025-10-25
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Reconstructing a manifold 3D mesh from a point cloud with normals is a challenging ill
formed problem within geometry processing. Building on the robust rotation system based
reconstruction method (RSR) in Ruiqi et al.[1], we present an improved version that runs
at up to 3 times the speed of the existing implementation in the GEL graphics library. We
also present a new mesh reconstruction method as an enhancement to the RSR method.
Our method reduces the number of points in the given point cloud, runs RSR, and then
reinserts the removed points to reconstruct a mesh. This method can run 30% faster than
plain RSR with some quality tradeoffs and can improve the quality of RSR in some cases.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Andreas Bærentzen, Ph.D. Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at DTU: Visual Computing
For his incredibly intuition and clever insights and enormous support throughout the project.
Blender developers and maintainers
For waking my interest in 3D graphics and providing an outlet for my creativity.
iv
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Work on GEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Topological preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Rotation System Reconstruction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
GEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Section I - High-Level Optimization
15
3.1
Methodology of High-Level Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
C++20 Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Fork-join model of parallelism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Inefficiencies in GEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Quantitative Performance Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Section II - Collapse and Reexpansion
37
4.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.2
Quality Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Algorithm Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.5
Re-expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.6
Ideas for parallelizing collapse and reexpand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5
Results
51
5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Parameter Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6
Gallery
63
7
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
73
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Deriving a 3D mesh from point clouds has been a longstanding problem in computational
geometry processing. The main difficulty stems from the ill-posed nature of the problem,
as there is no unique solution for any nontrivial configuration of vertices. As a result,
a large number of different methods have been developed that address the reconstruc-
tion problem in different ways. The different methods can broadly be placed into two
categories: volume-based methods and combinatorial methods. Volume-based methods
such as the one seen in fig. 1.1 typically have better performance but smooth the mesh as
the points are merely used to estimate a surface function. Smoothing can be desirable,
but can also result in a loss of fine detail.
(a) Stanford bunny reconstructed from a point
cloud using Blender geometry nodes
(b) Geometry nodes used to reconstruct the
point cloud.
Figure 1.1: Volume-based point cloud reconstruction in Blender.
Combinatorial methods, on the other hand, incorporate all points directly into a mesh.
This allows post-processing to be relegated to a separate step. If smoothing is desired,
for example, it can be done separately without being limited to the particular smoothing of
a volume-based method. However, these methods have to cope with the sheer combina-
torial explosion of potential solutions, which can still often fail to create a closed topology.
A fairly recent combinatorial method is the rotation system reconstruction (RSR) in Ruiqi et
al. [1] An implementation of this method exists in the GEL geometry processing library[2]
and an overview is presented in section 2.2.
A detailed literature review of point cloud reconstruction methods will not be provided in
this thesis. Interested readers are encouraged to look at [3] for a literature review and the
original paper on the rotation system reconstruction for a more detailed discussion of the
upsides and downsides of different reconstruction methods.
What I personally want to present in this thesis is a dive into the topic of geometry pro-
cessing as someone with a mixed background in engineering and theoretical computer
science. This project provided me with the opportunity to put my somewhat unique skills
to use as I worked to implement a performance-conscious combinatorial point cloud re-
construction scheme and improve an existing one.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
1
==PAGE:10==
The new combinatorial point reconstruction method presented in this thesis is based on
edge collapses. We construct a graph using k-nearest neighbors, and collapse the least
interesting edges that are most likely to be in the final mesh. We can then use a robust,
slow reconstruction algorithm like the rotation system reconstruction on a much smaller
graph and reintroduce the edges afterwards. Edge collapses and reinsertions are rela-
tively simple to decide, computationally cheap, and leave room for parallelism.
There are two key questions that I want to answer in this thesis. Firstly, what concrete per-
formance improvements can we attain from an existing robust point cloud reconstruction
algorithm in an established geometry processing library? Secondly, can we utilize edge
collapses as a more efficient method of point cloud reconstruction without compromising
on the quality of the robust rotation system reconstruction algorithm?
Perhaps the most important question, which is at the heart of how this thesis started, is
one that I cannot answer. The current form of the point cloud reconstruction within GEL
is underused. This is presumably because of the long running time required to actually
reconstruct meshes. In other words, will substantial performance improvements lead to
an increase in usage?
1.1
Work on GEL
One important area where this thesis diverges from a typical research thesis is that the
work has been directly done on top of GEL[2], an existing C++ library for geometry pro-
cessing maintained by my advisor Andreas Bærentzen. This put some immediate con-
straints on the thesis based on specific requirements that the library has. Namely, we
are limited to C++20 features, must support all three major compilers (GCC, Clang, and
MSVC), and we need to be careful in terms of what third party dependencies are included
with GEL, in order to ensure the lowest friction for downstream users. Most importantly,
any changes made to the library must not break existing use cases.
These restrictions have some interesting implications for the thesis. It became clear very
early on that the changes could not be restricted to purely the rotation system recon-
struction. This component touches nearly every part of GEL, including the linear algebra
library, the undirected graph, the attribute vector and the Manifold mesh. The perfor-
mance of RSR is, in a way, a lens into the performance of GEL. With performance being
the primary motivation for the project, I had to consider all of these parts as I worked. This
means that the scope of this thesis is much broader than presenting a new point cloud
reconstruction method. It would be disingenuous to present a 3x performance improve-
ment out of thin air without extensively elaborating on how I achieved this, and what my
methodology and philosophy were. This ended up being a very large topic on its own and
is covered in detail in chapter 3. There is not one single theme that connects all of per-
formance optimization, and I picked examples from the project that I think were the most
beneficial in terms of improving performance. This also required providing a substantial
amount of background information relevant to performance-oriented programming.
A further benefit of working on an existing geometry processing library is that we have an
obvious way of evaluating our results. By comparing the state of GEL as it existed before
this project, and after. Since GEL has a substantial number of end users according to my
advisor, any improvement we make is a performance win for potentially a lot of people.
Important background information that does not fit well into the main sections is found in
chapter 2. We first provide relevant topological preliminaries. Then we provide a descrip-
tion of the rotation system reconstruction used in GEL from[1]. While we contrast some
2
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:11==
aspects of rotation system reconstruction with the newly presented method, the new re-
construction method can be understood without knowledge of RSR. We also provide a
wider overview of GEL and some of its built-in data structures that come up within the rest
of the thesis.
In chapter 3, start with a general overview of high level optimization techniques within the
context of C++ in contrast with low level optimization and how I utilized these techniques
to improve the performance of specific parts of GEL. I also discuss parallelization. This
section is more pedagogical and somewhat independent from the rest of the thesis. How-
ever, I believe it is necessary to justifying the performance differences presented in the
results.
In chapter 4, I explain the collapse and reexpansion algorithm which is an efficient combi-
natorial reconstruction method for triangular meshes alongside some qualitative results.
Most of the quantitative results with tables and plots are separately placed in chapter 5.
A gallery of reconstructions can be seen in chapter 6.
All renders in this thesis have been created in Blender[4] unless stated otherwise. The
differences in light position and shading are incidental.
1.2
Acknowledgments
One thing that I want to acknowledge when writing this thesis is the nature of the sources
used that I relied on in production of both the project and this report, differed in relation
to what I used in previous academic reports of smaller scope. In many ways, computer
science has become less connected to the traditional academic orthodoxy. This can be
seen through the rise of Arxiv which publishes working drafts of papers that are yet to go
through peer review, but also through development blogs, mailing lists, and RFCs written
in markdown that live in GitHub. Not to mention the rise of community created manuals,
documentation, and books.
This thesis in many ways exist at the crossroads of computer science and software engi-
neering and as a result relies on a much wider variety of sources besides just conventional
research articles and conference proceedings. Engineers that work on complex real life
systems might write on personal or company blogs, but they are most likely not publish-
ing. This does not reduce the importance of their writing. I would like to acknowledge their
contribution in terms of shaping my philosophy to computer science and engineering.
As the author of this dissertation, I acknowledge that no generative AI was used during
the writing of this dissertation outside of rudimentary spellchecking tools. It is extremely
important to me that my writing carries my voice. Generative AI use for the rest of the
project has been very limited. I created 20 LLM conversations through CLion over the
span of 6 months. Only one of these conversations consisted of more than 1 message.
Most of these conversations did not relate to the projects directly with 5 conversations
about CMake, 4 conversations about race conditions, and 2 conversations about continu-
ous integration being the most popular. Out of well over 10 thousand lines of code written
in the span of this project, a very small amount of it was AI generated and all of it has
been manually checked by me.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Topological preliminaries
Discrete mesh representations use a finite number of vertices, the connectivity information
between the vertices and the existence of faces to define a surface. When more surface
detail is desired, discrete surfaces can be subdivided. When combined with a subdivision
method like Catmull-Clark[5], this has a smoothing effect. When less surface detail is
desired, they can be decimated[6].
Figure 2.1: An explicit triangular mesh.
An alternative to explicit discrete representations is using implicit surfaces. These meth-
ods represent surfaces as math equations. The zeros of the equation being points of the
surface. This allows arbitrary amount of detail to be stored in finite amount of memory.
Methods such as signed distance fields have been developed to put implicit surfaces to
great effect, but we will not be concerning ourselves with them in this paper.
Figure 2.2: Metaballs are an example of implicit mathematical surfaces.
Informally, a manifold is a hyper-surface that locally resembles Euclidean space. Mathe-
matical manifolds are way too general for our use case, so we will constrain the definition
of manifold to the one in definition 2.1.1.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
5
==PAGE:14==
Definition 2.1.1. From this point forward, a manifold is discrete surface in R3 that has
the following two properties:
1. Each edge has one or two surrounding faces.
2. Each vertex’s one ring is connected.
It follows that our manifolds locally resemble a finite 2D plane at every point.
A violation of rule 1 can be visualized in fig. 2.3. If the rectangular planes are connected
at their point of intersection with an edge, the points within that edge no longer find them-
selves in an area that can be projected to a 2D-plane.
Figure 2.3: A non-manifold mesh where three faces share a single edge.
A vertex’s one ring is its immediate neighborhood. The vertices, edges, and faces that
directly connect to this vertex. Informally, there must be a path comprising of only the
vertices in the half-ring. An example of violating rule 2 can be visualized in fig. 2.4.
Figure 2.4: A non-manifold mesh where a vertex lacks a connected one-ring.
Note that what makes these two examples non-manifold is connectivity and not topology.
fig. 2.3 can be made manifold by splitting the shared edge into two edges, and fig. 2.4
can be made manifold by splitting the shared vertex into two vertices. In both cases, the
mesh ends up being comprised of two components afterwards.
6
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:15==
In addition to these rules, a desirable property is to have all edges have a non-zero length.
Zero length edges in a manifold can typically be collapsed without affecting the topology
and doing so avoids some mathematical issues on algorithms that divide certain quantities
by the length of edges or the area of faces. This does not mean two vertices cannot share
the same position, just that no edges should exist between such vertices.
And finally, we will be dealing with triangular meshes exclusively. Working on triangles
greatly simplify algorithm design, three points are guaranteed to live on a single plane,
and even if we had n-gons, they are trivial to triangulate just by inserting some edges.
It is important to note that while we like dealing with manifolds in computational geometry
processing, interactive mesh editing tools such as Autodesk Maya and Blender trivially
allow creating non-manifold meshes. However, these tend to exist as intermediate states
during modeling rather than desirable final states.
2.1.1
The Euler-Poincaré Formula
Now that we have defined what a manifold is, we can talk about the typical properties
of a manifold. One of the most important properties of manifolds is expressed using
the Euler-Poincaré formula which relates the number of vertices, edges, and faces of a
manifold mesh with its global topology. To understand this, we need to understand genus,
segments, and boundaries.
Definition 2.1.2. The genus is a non-negative integer that is the number of cuts that can
be made to a manifold without making it disconnected. Informally, it represents how many
”holes” a manifold has.
A sphere has no holes, thus it has a genus of 0. A torus has one hole, thus it has a genus
of 1. And of course, a straw has a genus of 1, so it only has one hole.
(a) A sphere, a genus 0 object.
(b) A torus, a genus 1 object.
Figure 2.5: Two meshes with two different genera.
Definition 2.1.3. A segment is a disjoint part of a manifold. Two vertices are in different
segments if no path exists that connects them.
Definition 2.1.4. A boundary edge is an edge that only borders one face. A boundary is
a circular path consisting of only boundary edges.
The first version of the Euler-Poincaré formula applies to manifolds with spherical topol-
ogy. Those with a single segment, no boundaries, and a genus of 0.
Lemma 1. For a given manifold with spherical topology, the following equation holds:
|V |−|E| + |F| = 2
(2.1)
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
7
==PAGE:16==
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
(a) A disk has a single boundary.
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
(b) A Möbius strip also has a single boundary.
Figure 2.6: Boundary examples.
Quite a few proofs of lemma 1 are available[7], so we will not repeat any here. From this
formula, we can define the concept of an Euler operation.
Definition 2.1.5. An Euler operation is a modification of a manifold that maintains the
relation in eq. (2.1).
It can be trivially seen that the composition of Euler operations are also Euler operations.
The inverse of an Euler operation is also an Euler operation1.
However, the formula usually does not hold for manifolds with different genus, more than
a single segment, or boundaries. We can extend the formula to cover the general case
using lemma 2.
Lemma 2. Let g be the genus, s be the number of segments, and b be the number of
boundaries.
For a given manifold with arbitrary topology, the following equation holds:
|V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
(2.2)
We will not directly rely on this equation for the algorithms discussed within this thesis,
however it is important that Euler operations on spherical meshes are also Euler opera-
tions on all manifold meshes.
We particularly care about three Euler operations.
1. Flip an edge (See fig. 2.7).
2. Collapse an edge, combine vertices.
3. Split a vertex, create an edge and two faces.
Lemma 3. An edge flip is an Euler operation.
Proof. We dissolve the edge, creating a quad:
|V |−(|E| −1) + (|F| −1) = 2(s −g) −b
We insert an edge at the opposing corner:
|V |−(|E| −1 + 1) + (|F| −1 + 1) = |V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
1I do not believe Euler operations form a group. The problem is they are highly context sensitive and
are not defined for arbitrary manifolds. For example, an edge collapse cannot be performed on a manifold
consisting of a single triangle. A vertex can be sliced through two incident edges but only if those edges are
not boundary edges. Thus they are not total functions.
8
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:17==
v4
v3
v2
v1
(a) Before flip.
v4
v3
v2
v1
(b) After flip.
Figure 2.7: An edge flip. An edge flip is a special case of an edge rotation on an edge
sitting between two triangles.
Lemma 4. An edge collapse is an Euler operation.
Proof. If the faces that the edge shares are not triangles, then no faces are erased during
the collapse. In which case, we have:
(|V | −1)−(|E| −1) + |F| = |V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
If one of the faces is a triangle, the face is collapsed and the two remaining edges become
one edge. Thus:
(|V | −1)−(|E| −2) + (|F| −1) = |V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
If both of the faces are triangles, then:
(|V | −1)−(|E| −3) + (|F| −2) = |V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
Lemma 5. A vertex split is an Euler operation.
Proof. A vertex split is done through picking an ordered pair of edges (h1, h2) in the one-
ring of the vertex. A vertex, two faces, and three edges are produced as a result of the
split. Edges that fall in one side of (h1, h2) are assigned to the old vertex and edges that
are on the other side are assigned to the new vertex. Thus, we have:
(|V | + 1)−(|E| + 3) + |F + 2| = |V |−|E| + |F| = 2(s −g) −b
Finally, there are two important properties that we will rely on.
Lemma 6. All manifolds are related through a series of Euler operations.
Lemma 7. All triangle meshes with the same topology are related through a series of
edge flips.
A complete proof of these statements is out of the scope of this thesis. However, they
suggest that we find our desired topology through just a series of Euler operations. In
practice, we are not searching for the optimal sequence of Euler operations, but merely a
good one.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Rotation System Reconstruction
As this thesis builds upon what is presented in [1], it is important to understand the recon-
struction method.
The reconstruction is based on two important insights. The first is that a tree structure
forms a manifold with disk topology that has a single boundary polygon that trivially does
not self intersect. The second is that, such a tree plus an associated rotation system pro-
vide a planar embedding in 2D, such that some combination of edge insertions maintain
the non-intersection property.
In more plain terms: we can start from a point cloud, initialize a graph by connecting
nearby points, calculate a minimum spanning tree from this graph, and then insert edges
that maintain the manifold property until we run out of edges to insert or every polygon
becomes triangular. A summary of the process can be seen in figs. 2.8 and 2.9.
Figure 2.8: The reconstruction process summarized in 2D. From the rotation system
based reconstruction paper[1]. Used with permission.
A way to visualize this process is that we start by constructing a minimum spanning tree
containing every vertex of our point cloud. This tree can be considered a manifold where
every vertex is part of a single vacuous polygon. We then insert edges one by one to this
polygon, which splits it to ever smaller polygons until we either run out of edges to insert,
or every polygon except the boundary polygon becomes triangular.
Algorithm 1 summarizes rotation system reconstruction at a high level. The algorithm also
relies on the existence of normals which are estimated if they are absent. A summary of
each step is as follows:
• Generate k-nearest neighbors graph. This step calculates the-k nearest neigh-
bors of each vertex and caches some important information about them such as
their distance and normal angles.
• Find components. If the graph is in multiple disjoint components, this splits it to
multiple graphs.
• Initialize minimum spanning tree. This calculates the minimum spanning tree of
the k-nearest neighbor connected graph.
10
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:19==
• Initialize rotation system. This step sets up the rotation system and generates
edge candidates based on normal angles.
• Sort edges. Edges are sorted from shortest to longest.
• Insert edges Edges are inserted based on two tests. The topology test ensures
that the the two corners of the inserted edge belong to the same face in the graph.
The geometry test ensures that any inserted edge does not cross any existing edge
within the tangent plane. Each insertion potentially adds two triangles to the mani-
fold.
• Connect handles. This step bridges vertices within the boundary face of the graph.
This fills holes within the manifold.
• Triangulate. The remaining non-triangular faces are converted to triangles.
• Build Manifold. The graph representation is converted to the Manifold represen-
tation within GEL by passing a list of face triangles and our coordinates.
Algorithm 1 An overview of the rotation system reconstruction algorithm.
Input: points : List[R3], normals : List[R3], k : Nat
Output: M : Manifold
Γ : Graph ←knnGraph(points, r, k)
for G : Graph in components(Γ) do
CO ←buildCircularOrdering(G, normals)
MST : Graph ←initMST(G)
(M, RS) ←(MST, buildRS(MST, CO))
Q ←sortEdges(G)
for edge : Edge in Q do
if topologyTest(M, RS, edge) ∧geometryTest(M, RS, edge, theta, points) then
M ←insertEdge(M, edge)
RS ←updateRS(RS, CO, edge)
end if
end for
M ←connectHandle(M, RS, n)
M ←triangulate(M, RS)
M ←outputMesh(M, RS, points)
end for
Rotation system reconstruction is highly reliant on high quality normals as the normal di-
rection is used to project each edge to the plane. A poor quality normal input can dramat-
ically reduce the reconstruction quality and cause certain parts of a mesh to be inverted
resulting in large boundaries that cannot be crossed.
2.3
GEL
”GEometry and Linear algebra”
GEL is a C++ library for computational geometry processing[2]. Python bindings are also
included as part of the pygel3d package[8]. GEL has accumulated a variety of features
over the last 10 years with an emphasis on differential geometry and mesh analysis. I
will not summarize every feature of GEL except a few that are particularly relevant to us.
These are the built-in data structures. The kd-tree, the AMGraph, the Manifold, and the
Euler Tour Forest.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) A point cloud visualized as spheres.
(b) Graph initialized with k nearest neighbors.
(c) Minimum spanning tree of the graph.
(d) Completed reconstruction.
Figure 2.9: The reconstruction process illustrated on the Stanford bunny.
CGLA2 is GEL’s built-in linear algebra library and it is used by just about every other com-
ponent. This means that any performance inefficiency within CGLA can have a dramatic
effect on the overall performance of GEL. Most of the functions within CGLA operate on
small dimensional vectors and matrices.
The KdTree structure is a binary tree structure that is used for distance queries. It takes
O(|V | log |V |) time to construct, allowing k-neighbors of a single vertex to be calculated
in O(k log |V |) time.
The AMGraph is a straightforward non-sparse undirected graph implementation that only
stores connectivity information. Users can inherit the class to add data per vertex or per
edge. Node and edge insertion take O(1) time. Edge queries also take O(1) time and
shared neighbor queries take O(v(i)) time where v is the valency of the given node.3
The workhorse of GEL is the Manifold4 data structure. The Manifold data structure
contains a connectivity kernel with a half-edge based representation as can be seen in
fig. 2.10.
A half-edge is akin to a directed edge. Each face is circulated counter-clockwise by their
half-edges. The next field points to the next half-edge counter-clockwise and the prev
field points to the previous. The opp field points to the opposite half-edge that is part of
2Likely a wordplay on CGAL. A popular computational graphics library.
3Due to the usage of std::map before the start of the thesis to store connectivity information, most oper-
ations were O(v(i)) times slower.
4I will use fixed-width text to distinguish it from mathematical manifolds for the rest of this thesis.
12
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:21==
opp
face
prev
next
vertex
h
last
Figure 2.10: Summary of the half-edge representation. From the GEL documentation.
Used with permission.
the other face that shares that edge. The vertex field points to the vertex the half-edge
is directed at while the face field points to the face the half-edge belongs to.
1
struct ConnectivityKernel {
2
// This is not the exact implementation of the
3
// ConnectivityKernel but is accurate enough for
4
// our needs.
5
6
struct HalfEdge {
7
HalfEdgeID
next;
8
HalfEdgeID
prev;
9
HalfEdgeID
opp;
10
VertexID
vertex;
11
Option <FaceID> face; // None if half-edge is a boundary half-edge
12
};
13
14
struct Vertex {
15
HalfEdgeID
h;
16
};
17
18
struct Face {
19
HalfEdgeID
last;
20
};
21
22
ItemVector <HalfEdge > half_edges;
23
ItemVector <Vertex>
vertices;
24
ItemVector <Face>
faces;
25
26
};
If we are at a half-edge pointing away from a vertex, it is possible to circulate that vertex
by going to the opposite half-edge and then the next half-edge.
The connectivity of the Manifold is exhaustively described by just the half-edges. The
vertices and faces store only a single handle to a half-edge that make it easier to traverse
the manifold and run algorithms per-vertex and per-face.
It is worth noting that the half-edge representation cannot represent non-orientable sur-
faces such as the Möbius strip in fig. 2.6b as some of the half-edges would have to point
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
13
==PAGE:22==
in both directions.
The Euler Tour Forest or ETF is a single use structure that has a self balancing tree that
is used to maintain the rotation systems in the rotation system reconstruction component.
14
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:23==
3
Section I - High-Level Optimization
In his seminal 1974 paper ”Structured Programming with goto Statements”, Donald Knuth
made the following observation [9]:
”We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: prema-
ture optimization is the root of all evil. Yet we should not pass up our opportu-
nities in that critical 3%”
This claim was subsequently taken out of context by many different people, often as an
argument to forego any performance optimization on a piece of software until very late in
development. However, it is important to remember a few things here. The first is that
the 1970s was a very different environment for programming. Peephole optimizations
conceptually existed[10] but optimizing compilers were overall new. Constant propaga-
tion through control flow for example, something that is taken for granted with modern
optimizing compilers, would have been particularly novel, as evidenced by this[11] 1991
paper.
So, optimization often meant doing the work that an optimizing compiler would do by hand,
often at an enormous cost to system maintainability. Even with computational problems
that are vastly simpler than the ones in this thesis, writing such code is very tedious and the
result is often very difficult to maintain. In many cases modifications could mean starting
from scratch.
The potential payoff of optimizations is furthermore limited by human memory. An opti-
mizing compiler works through accumulating a series of facts and lemmas throughout the
code and generating new ones through a series of transformations that are allowed based
on the language standard. These systems already have trouble keeping track of all of the
facts through potentially destructive transformations and improving them is a major area
of compiler research[12]. Humans simply never had a chance.
Regardless, GEL is a mature software library that is over 10 years old. Even the most
fierce defender of waiting until the last possible moment to begin optimizing would admit
that performance is something that might be worth looking into.
I want to present two important ideas in this section. The first is that high-level optimization
is something that is (normatively) worth pursuing. This is in contrast to modern software
engineering principles that de-emphasize optimization. For this, I will provide both posi-
tive evidence in terms of the benefits of performance oriented code, as well as negative
evidence primarily in terms of the downsides of neglecting performance in parts of the
library.
The second idea I want to present is the concept of high-level optimization in contrast to
low-level optimization. Low-level optimization, to make a quick caricature, puts a focus on
minute implementation details and often relies on inspecting generated assembly directly
as well as micro-benchmarks to ensure the soundness of these changes in isolation and
further benchmarking to avoid regressions. Low level optimization still very much has its
place in performance-conscious programming but due to the scope of the project involving
relatively large amount of high level behavioral changes, it was not a big focus to ensure
the optimal efficiency of small pieces of code.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
15
==PAGE:24==
I will try to frame this section in terms of the optimization process and the strategies I have
employed rather than presenting a strict list of changes and then performance differences
of those changes, with the goal of conveying the breadth and depth of this topic. This also
means that we will worry ourselves with a lot of background detail, but I believe that when
we get through the background, many of the changes will speak for themselves. This
section may also appear somewhat all over the place within the overall thesis, but high
level optimization is a holistic process that might resemble a rabbit hole in many cases and
due to the likelihood that the results of this section are much more likely to immediately
benefit users of GEL and those who wish to reconstruct meshes, I find it very important to
document the processes described here. Finally, we will look at the overall performance
improvement in rotation system reconstruction after these changes.
3.1
Methodology of High-Level Optimization
The process I used to identify optimization opportunities and execute them can be suc-
cinctly summarized as follows:
1. Use profiling to identify optimization opportunities.
2. Use profiling to test whether the optimization succeeded.
We will discuss what profiling is shortly, but it is also important to add that it is not the
only important thing when it comes to high-level optimization. Understanding the code
and the algorithms that are used is also equally important and noticing discrepancies
between the code and the profiling results is an essential skill when it comes to profile-
driven optimization.
After identifying and implementing an optimization, the same profiling process can be
used to assess the effectiveness of the optimization, identify new opportunities, or when
the optimization is unsuccessful, get insight as to why.
3.1.1
Profile-Driven Optimization
The idea behind profile-driven optimization is to collect data during benchmark, usually
with the assistance of hardware performance counters, and use this data to make opti-
mization decisions.
The most important tool we have for profile-driven optimization is the flamegraph[13]. The
flamegraph provides an executive summary of the runtime performance characteristics of
a particular program. The vertical axis on a flamegraph represents the call stack. The
higher up you are, the deeper you are in the call stack and the narrower each line gets.
The horizontal axis represents time spent and blocks are sorted from longest to shortest.
An example of a flamegraph can be seen in fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: An example flamegraph.
16
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:25==
Flamegraphs rely on sampling from hardware performance counters[14]. This means that
they cannot report the precise start and end time of particular function calls and all calls to
a particular function at a specific stack depth will be combined in the call graph. Another
limitation is that since performance counters are per-CPU, multithreaded algorithms will
generate a lot more samples which might skew the big picture, but this is generally not a
problem in the optimization process.
An important thing to note when looking at flamegraphs is that they are a relative rather
than an absolute measure. It is not possible to compare the runtime by just looking at two
different flamegraphs without also timing the code.
An alternative to hardware performance counters is directly injecting calls to system timers
in the code and recording the results. However, this can be misleading. Besides system
calls adding potential overhead, there is the possibility that the compiler reorders or moves
computations that might result in inaccurate readings. The compiler might also be pre-
vented from performing certain optimizations which might result in inaccurate readings. In
a way, code in the presence of an optimizing compiler is much like a quantum mechanical
system. One that is very difficult to observe without disturbing the system.
I mainly used this to take quick glances at the runtime of core parts of the algorithm since
these tend to have a fairly long runtime and cannot be trivially reordered by the compiler.
There is also benchmarking. Benchmarking can be seen as a more sophisticated and
consistent use of software time measurement. Benchmarking software can isolate over-
head created by system calls and can also perform a warm-up to saturate caches and
ensure that results are more consistent.
When benchmarking is used to compare small pieces of code, this is called micro-benchmarking.
Micro-benchmarks can be especially useful for identifying poorly thought out optimiza-
tions[15]. However, it is important to keep in mind that just because a piece of code
may run faster in a micro-benchmark does not necessarily mean it will be faster in a real
situation. I will discuss some reasons for this in the following sections.
For benchmarking, the main tool that I used is the nanobench library[16]. An example of
how nanobench is used can be seen in listing 3.1.1. It is possible to pass in the batch
size and batch unit to have nanobench pretty print runtime statistics.
1
const auto x_size = 100UL;
2
const auto y_size = 100UL;
3
ankerl::nanobench::Bench()
4
.unit("vertex")
5
.batch(x_size * y_size)
6
.run("10 thousand vertex Manifold", [&]() {
7
auto m = create_rectangular_manifold(x_size , y_size);
8
ankerl::nanobench::doNotOptimizeAway(m);
9
});
Listing 3.1: Nanobench usage example.
If hardware performance counters are enabled, nanobench also displays the number of
instructions per unit, number of branches per unit and the cache miss rate.
These methods make up the basic toolkit of profile driven optimization. There are other
important tools of course, such as a disassembler. But that tends to be more useful when
a performance issue is identified and just looking at the assembly can end up being quite
misleading[15].
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
17
==PAGE:26==
3.1.2
Optimization heuristics
Perhaps the most difficult part about understanding optimization, be it high-level or low-
level is learning the philosophy and the mindset. Optimization is unintuitive, not in the
sense that it contradicts the programmer’s intuition but in the sense that a careless opti-
mization can have catastrophic results and the programmer should always verify that an
optimization actually achieves its intended goal and if it does not, they should understand
why that particular optimization failed.
So, I will try to explain the philosophy of optimization within the context of systems with
optimizing compilers. This is particularly important for us as the rise in complexity in mod-
ern software has made compilers and compiler optimizations essential and it is important
to understand what the compiler does and work with the compiler to ensure efficient code.
Optimization is global. Optimizing compilers reason about code non-locally. The com-
piler might notice that a piece of code is worth inlining, which may result in a large amount
of code becoming dead, which is then removed, which presents another inlining opportu-
nity, and so on. This has some interesting corollaries.
Namely, the actual machine code generated depends both on unaffiliated code before that
point and sometimes even code afterwards (especially in the case of nasal demons[17]
[18]). On one hand, this is terrible. It means that any potential change we make in the
code can have catastrophic performance consequences. Obviously, we can guard against
some of this with benchmarking and regression testing. However, there is an interesting
upside. Adding sanity checks may sometimes have no effect on performance or may even
improve performance because the compiler is able to hoist its own sanity checks. More
generally, we can write in a style which helps the compiler accumulate lemmas and be
able to use them for more efficient code generation. Obfuscating code on the other hand
will typically produce worse performance.
This also applies at a higher level. When working on an algorithm that rely on a chain of
operations while maintaining certain properties of the output, doing more work at one point
may allow doing less work later. In a way, chapter 4 can be seen as an application of this
idea. We are trying to move the work to a level where we are able to apply optimizations
more easily.
Finding the optimal requires checking an exponentially growing algorithm family.
When optimizing something, we can enumerate certain variables which affect the perfor-
mance of the algorithm. We can use matrix multiplication as a crude example. Here is a
naive matrix multiplication code:
1
float a[M][K];
2
float b[K][N];
3
float c[M][N];
4
5
for (int i = 0; i < M; i++) {
6
for (int j = 0; j < N; j++) {
7
c[i][j] = 0;
8
for (int k = 0; k < K; k++) {
9
c[i][j] += a[i][k] * b[k][j];
10
}
11
}
12
}
Listing 3.2: Naive matrix multiplication in C.
Firstly, the order of the loops turns out to be very important and there are 6 orderings. We
18
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:27==
set the elements of the target matrix to 0 inside the loop but we can set it to 0 all at once
outside or we can write to a temporary variable and then copy them to the matrix at the
end. For sufficiently large matrices, it is also common to add further inner loops to operate
on portions of the matrix (for reasons that will be explained soon). As it turns out, it is also
not uncommon to first copy elements from one matrix into a 1D array and then perform the
inner loop. It is also easy to notice that we are doing relatively little work per loop iteration
and do more than one multiplication each loop, but what is the right number? And that is
before going into more exotic topics such as alignment and SIMD.
Since each of these potential parameters can be combined, the result is that the num-
ber of brute force matrix multiplication algorithms grow exponentially in the number of
parameters. And the main limiting factor in the number of parameters is ideas.
To make matters even more complicated, it turns out which combination of parameters
results in the fastest multiplication relies not just on the algorithm but also on input sizes.
Certain optimizations only become worthwhile on sufficiently large inputs. And similarly,
with very small matrices, directly solving is oftentimes much more efficient. The properties
of the input also turn out to be important. If the matrix is sparse for example, matrix
multiplication can often be done much more efficiently by only keeping track of non-zero
elements.
As it turns out, despite the sheer number of different parameters to optimize in this situa-
tion, a lot of developers have a fairly good intuition that the code in the listing is going to
be fairly slow and come up with ways to speed it up. We can do this because code does
not exist in a vacuum from the compiler and the hardware.
Optimization relies on heuristics. The goal of hardware designers, compiler designers,
and programmers align when it comes to making code run fast. Hardware can have
systems that are transparent to the programming model but are incredibly important to
writing fast code. Why is the naive naive implementation of matrix multiplication slow?
Because it makes very poor use of cache locality. How can adding an additional step
copying to a temporary array provide a speedup? Because it pushes memory operations
that result in cache misses out of the loop with a loop dependency. This also means that
any loop unrolling and vectorization in the inner loop will no longer be bogged down by
memory latencies.
The two heuristics in this example are maximizing cache locality and separating mem-
ory operations from arithmetic ones. However, we will talk about many more heuristics
throughout this report. But there are two that we should nearly always keep in mind.
1. Cache locality
2. Predictable branches
A ”big lie” of algorithmic complexity analysis is the assumption that random memory ac-
cesses have O(1) time complexity in terms of the number of accesses or in terms of the
problem size. In practice, this is false[19]. The processor cache is much faster but also
significantly smaller than system memory. And the same applies to the system memory
and storage. And storage and network drives. Processors can compensate for mem-
ory latency by prefetching data to the cache. But this relies on memory accesses being
predictable. In the case of completely unpredictable memory accesses, random memory
access has approximately O(√n) time complexity in the number of accesses1.
1Also see [20] for a somewhat more empirical model.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
19
==PAGE:28==
This is highly relevant to us because we are working with graph algorithms. When we
do an operation that requires traversing a graph, we might pay a significant performance
penalty.
Predictable branches have an impact on performance due to two important properties
of hardware that do not exist at the code level. Instruction level parallelism (ILP) where
hardware executes multiple instructions at a time, and speculation where hardware starts
executing instructions before determining that it has to execute those instructions. The
latter being necessary to maximize the payoff of ILP. This means that branches that are
predictable like loop checks are fast, but branches that are relatively random like binary
searches can be slow. This is something to keep in mind during algorithm design.
The optimal is situational. As mentioned previously, sometimes it is important to spe-
cialize algorithms to optimize performance. A common example can be searching. If your
key size and number of elements are low, an array will often be the fastest to search. If
they’re somewhat bigger, a B-tree may be faster, and if they’re very large, a hash table
might win out. In many cases, we have some prior information about our problem that
can allow us to specialize our algorithms to optimize performance.
3.1.3
The Verification Problem
If it’s a bug that people rely on, it’s not a bug, it’s a feature.
The verification problem is the difficulty involved with validating that a certain code trans-
formation maintains the original behavior. This could mean a strictly specified behavior, a
contract, or some high level behavior which is about whether an output has certain prop-
erties. Most projects probably rely on testing for this, although testing is not the same
thing as a proof, and there might still be behavior that you are not testing for, that your
downstream users rely on.
It does not help that GEL did not have any automated testing before the start of this
thesis. Setting up automated testing was one of the first things I did using doctest[21].
Nevertheless, tests do not write themselves and I had a general concern that any of the
introduced changes could potentially break something.
There is a small discrepancy between the results of the reference implementation and
the results of the updated implementation of the rotation system reconstruction. Some
difference was expected of course. The original (erroneously) used 32-bit floats while the
updated one uses 64-bit floats. Some changes were done to greatly simplify the code,
which allowed a clearer picture of things and further optimizations as a result, but may
have also introduced subtle edge cases where the results are better or worse. Since the
reconstruction problem is ill formed and there is no unique answer, and since it is very dif-
ficult to extract information from the output, it is hard to come up with properties to actually
check2. Even with good heuristics, any supposed regression might have other unrelated
cases where the changes result in improvements, making assessment challenging.
3.2
C++20 Features
High performance code is often associated with procedural or imperative programming
styles. This is understandable in some respects. The hardware itself is imperative and
racy. C compilers have spent decades optimizing imperative code. But there are some
problems that are best dealt with in an entirely different way, which gave a birth to the
functional style[22]. One of the simplest examples is injecting some behavior into a func-
tion. The solution in imperative programming is function pointers or fat structs, while OOP
2And using a test oracle is also completely out of the question.
20
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:29==
offers objects referred to by a pointer containing another pointer to a vtable. These both
rely on compilers devirtualizing the function calls for performance. C++11 lambda expres-
sions offer a comparatively terse3 way of injecting behavior while being able to capture
the state without any additional overhead. There are several other ideas from functional
programming that are important to us in terms of performance. Namely, lazy functors
which are provided by the views library.
3.2.1
Views
C++ views are a part of the ranges library[23] introduced in C++20. The ranges library
serves both as an extension and a replacement of the much older iterator pair based
algorithms that have been in C++ for quite a long time. Although ranges have many neat
features, we are primarily interested in a specific one: views. Informally, views are C++
iterators that are cheaply copyable. 4 They are created by passing a valid range into a
view adapter.
1
namespace std::ranges::views {
2
// Note that range adaptors are implemented as function objects
3
4
all // identity element
5
// View<A> -> View<A>
6
7
filter // like the functional filter
8
// (View<A>, (A -> bool)) -> View<A>
9
10
take // like the functional take
11
// (View<A>, Int) -> View<A>
12
13
drop // like the functional skip
14
// (View<A>, Int) -> View<A>
15
16
transform // functor interface , like the functional map
17
// (View<A>, (A -> B)) -> View<B>
18
19
join // monadic join, like the functional flatten
20
// View<View<A>> -> View<A>
21
}
C++ view adapters form a monoid under a join operation, represented with
auto operator|(Adapter&&, Adapter&&) and the neutral element std::views::all. In
non-category theory terms, they do not have the composition limitations of the built in
looping constructs. Many algorithms that would require intermediate results to be saved
can be often be written using view adapters.
The downside of using views is that they are difficult to debug. You typically cannot check
the elements of a view in a debugger without having a container take elements from it.
Furthermore, the views library as available in C++20 is very limited missing many es-
sential adapters that would only be added in C++23 and C++26. Regardless, they were
an important part of abstracting many examples of iteration that would have otherwise
required intermediate allocations.
3I should add that lambda expressions in C++ are very verbose but they are much shorter than writing a
functor or a dedicated object.
4Note that this does not preclude views from having ownership. Views with unique ownership enforce
cheap copying by being move only, resulting in a compile time error when they would be copied. See[24].
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
21
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Fork-join model of parallelism
The fork join model[25] is a relatively simple model of parallelism where at specific points
during the execution, work is distributed from a parent thread to several child threads
(the fork), the parent blocks until the child threads finish the work, and then the result is
combined (the join).
fork
join
Figure 3.2: The fork join model.
The main reason why this model is desirable is local reasoning. The entire algorithm is
treated as a sequential computation and we can parallelize each step individually. But
more importantly, each step can have a somewhat specialized parallelized algorithm. It
also seems like C++ supports this out of the box using execution policies[26]. These can
be passed as an additional argument to standard algorithms to potentially run them in
parallel. However, Apple Clang does not support this feature[27], so I had to write them
on my own. Here is the signature of a fairly simple one:
1
template <SizedRange InputIt ,
2
SizedRange OutputIt ,
3
EnumMapper <InputIt , OutputIt > F>
4
auto enumerate_map(IExecutor& pool, const InputIt& it, OutputIt&& out, F&& f)
-> decltype(out);
Listing 3.3: A parallel algorithm signature using C++20 concepts.
Although many parallel algorithms are nothing more than fancy for loops with marginally
more type safety bolted on than openmp directives, it is also possible to express relatively
complicated relationships like a fold.
1
template <std::copy_constructible State, SizedRange I, FoldFunctor <State, I> F>
2
auto fold(IExecutor& pool, const I& it, State&& initial , State&& identity , F&&
f) -> State;
Listing 3.4: A parallel fold algorithm signature using C++ concepts.
There is the additional requirement that the State struct is a monoid5, it needs to have
an identity so we can partition our input range and perform the folds in parallel, using the
identity as the initial state; and it needs to have associativity so the order of which the
folds are being performed does not matter6.
The main trick comes down to actually finding operations where parallelization gains more
performance than thread spawning overhead.
5Note that a fold is actually a generalization of the monoidal reduction since we map from the input type
and the state to the new state.
6In practice, although IEEE-754 floating point operations are not strictly associative, this generally does
not prevent them from being folded over.
22
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:31==
3.3.1
Alternative models: Synchronization Primitives
An alternative model of parallelism involves using synchronization primitives directly in-
side algorithms. Synchronization primitives are atomic variables, mutexes, condition vari-
ables, semaphores, barriers etc. I have made the decision to avoid using these outside of
the implementation of parallel algorithms. However, I think it is important to explain why
so many programmers still associate parallelism with the usage of these primitives.
The main way someone can cause data races in the fork-join model is by violating the
mutability XOR aliasing rule. A reference can either be shared or mutable. A simple
way to ensure this is to use value semantics for everything which can be catastrophic
for performance; even if we are using references, the ways where we can violate this
rule is limited. In practice, if we ensure that the input and output ranges do not alias and
the passed closure is pure, we are free of data races. Synchronization primitives can be
shared and mutable at the same time, but in exchange, they have specific and complex
semantics and easy footguns.
The biggest problem by far is contention. If you’re using locks and multiple threads try
acquiring the lock at the same time, you’re going to have a potentially major performance
loss. In addition, if you have multiple locks7, you also open yourself up to the possibility
of a deadlock. Locks are most useful when concurrency is a requirement of a system
but parallelism is not and the system often cannot account for when the lock holders will
access the protected variable. This is not the case for our rotation system reconstruction
algorithm which has frequent writes and relatively uniform steps.
There are of course a family of lockless concurrency algorithms that could have been
useful. But those still work better when they are encapsulated. For example, a lockless
queue could have been useful in a few places but we have decided to prioritize other
areas where the parallelism was simpler to exploit and the expected payoff was larger.
3.3.2
Alternative models: Computation Expressions and Monads
There is also one more model that is relevant to our goals of parallelism. This model
lacks a single name as far as I am aware but the general pattern relies on a type system
to encapsulate (or embellish) computation itself as a primitive and then compose these
computations while specifying the rules that the programmer wants these computations
to follow (for example, whether they are executed in a specific order). The primitive that is
most closely associated with computation is the monad, although most languages tend to
use a different phrase and monads are categorically much more broad than just express-
ing computation.
Rust’s Send and Sync traits and async, F#’s async and task expressions, and Haskell’s
ST monad are tools that utilize the type system of the respective language to allow per-
forming parallel computations with well defined semantics without having to worry about
data races.
The drawback of these tools is that they can often introduce unwanted overhead espe-
cially if the problem is small. That is why it is common to see these used much more
commonly as concurrency tools in IO heavy workloads than for parallelism directly. They
also introduce function coloring and can in some cases dramatically increase the com-
plexity of implementations.
I would like to emphasize this point, that I am not in any way suggesting that it was wrong
to write GEL in C++, or that GEL should be ported to a different language. C and C++
7Or the potential to acquire the same lock twice and you are not using a re-entrant mutex.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
23
==PAGE:32==
were designed at a time where multiple processors were the exception rather than the
standard. C++ itself predates POSIX threads and did not receive its concurrency support
library until C++11. Our general understanding of concurrency within a single program
was quite limited.
I find it important to write this down here as one of the original goals of this thesis project
was to explore parallelization opportunities within the rotation system reconstruction com-
ponent in GEL. This was something that occupied a part of my mind due to my previous
experience in F# and Rust but I was unable to experiment with everything because I sim-
ply lacked the tools to do so. But for future libraries, the authors should consider the
multi-threaded or even GPU accelerated case from the start.
3.4
Inefficiencies in GEL
Now that we have a general understanding of the optimization process, we can dig into
GEL itself and talk about some avenues for performance improvements. This section is
by no means comprehensive.
3.4.1
Temporary Allocations and add_face
When performing theoretical performance analysis of algorithms, the potential perfor-
mance cost of memory allocation rarely comes up. I suspect the reason for this is twofold:
The first is that malloc, the system allocator, is typically assumed to have O(1) time com-
plexity in terms of input size. The second is that space complexity is analyzed separately
from time complexity, and if malloc somehow is not O(1) in that platform, the actual time
complexity can be inferred by looking at the space complexity.
I will not provide a complete description of how malloc works, as it differs from platform
to platform and we are not interested in every implementation detail. But I will write the
essentials that are relatively common across platforms and everything written here is ac-
curate for glibc malloc[28] which is what I primarily used for the project.
Memory allocation is a multi step process. The allocator has to first request memory from
the operating system. The operating system typically does not check if enough memory
exists to fulfill the request but immediately returns with an unused page. The memory
allocator then writes some metadata and passes a pointer to the user. When an actual
write occurs into the page (be it from the allocator or from the user), the operating system
traps the write, maps the virtual page to a physical one, and zeroes out the memory (for
security reasons).
Although memory being zeroed out means that memory allocation is O(n)8, but in prac-
tice, zeroing out memory in a linear fashion is quite fast. The biggest problem is that from
allocating memory to actually using memory, there can be quite a few context switches
between userspace and the kernel. These can be spotted in a flamegraph by searching
for page faults as can be seen in fig. 3.3. Context switches are expensive on their own
and they can partially thrash cache.
This is already a good enough reason to be wary of allocations, but things get even gnarlier
when we consider multi-threaded programs. The system allocator is a static object that
must be safe to call from any thread. Crude locking is highly undesirable because the allo-
cator might block any number of threads until the operating system finishes its task. How-
ever, there are several common optimizations performed to ensure high multi-threaded
throughput. The first is that large allocations are typically just passed to mmap directly.
8On Linux, it is possible to request pages with uninitialized memory by passing MAP_UNINITIALIZED to
mmap, but this requires recompiling the kernel and is highly discouraged outside of embedded devices[29].
24
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.3: Flamegraph showing that the runtime of a given push operation is dominated
by the OS.
The OS always has to contend with multiple processes mapping pages, and for large al-
locations, wasting some fraction of the page size is irrelevant. These allocations are also
easier to grow. The second is the usage of fine grained locking, providing each thread
with its own heap if possible. This means that if threads do not transfer ownership of
their pointers, there will be far less contention. Regardless, performance degradations in
multi-threaded programs due to the system allocator has been a pervasive enough prob-
lem that it was very common for many applications to prefer alternative system allocators
like jemalloc[30] that were better designed for this task9.
There is also a much simpler and very consistent way of avoiding any potential overhead
associated with memory allocation and that is not allocating in the first place. In the past,
the ”dumb” way of doing this was to use a fixed size buffer in the stack (or worse, in
static storage) which is responsible for a huge number of stack buffer overflow exploits.
Even if you carefully check that no input overflows a fixed size stack allocation, the end
result is code that cannot handle every scenario. Even if the allocated stack size is large
enough for any realistic input, your function will fail in some cases and I regret to inform
that unnecessary stack allocations will also degrade performance.
Now that we are thoroughly motivated to avoid unnecessary allocations as much as pos-
sible, I would like to present a case study from a very important function in Manifold. The
add_face function inserts a new polygon into the Manifold, the original implementation
can be seen below:
1
FaceID Manifold::add_face(const std::vector <Manifold::Vec>& points)
2
{
3
struct Edge
4
{
5
HalfEdgeID h0 = InvalidHalfEdgeID;
6
HalfEdgeID h1 = InvalidHalfEdgeID;
7
int count;
8
};
9
10
int N = points.size();
11
vector <VertexID > vertices(N);
12
for(size_t i=0;i<points.size(); ++i) {
9Many of jemalloc’s improvements have later been brought to glibc malloc, so we do not have to worry
about this as much.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
25
==PAGE:34==
13
vertices[i]=kernel.add_vertex();
14
pos(vertices[i]) = points[i];
15
}
16
vector <Edge> edges(N);
17
for(size_t i=0;i<N; ++i) {
18
VertexID v0 = vertices[i];
19
VertexID v1 = vertices[(i+1)%points.size()];
20
21
Edge& e = edges[i];
22
e.h0 = kernel.add_halfedge();
23
e.h1 = kernel.add_halfedge();
24
e.count = 1;
25
26
// glue operation: 1 edge = 2 glued halfedges
27
glue(e.h0, e.h1);
28
29
// update halfedges with the vertices they point to
30
kernel.set_vert(e.h0, v1);
31
kernel.set_vert(e.h1, v0);
32
33
kernel.set_out(vertices[(i+1)%N], edges[i].h1);
34
}
35
36
FaceID fid = kernel.add_face();
37
for(size_t i=0;i<N; ++i) {
38
kernel.set_face(edges[i].h0, fid);
39
kernel.set_face(edges[i].h1, InvalidFaceID);
40
link(edges[i].h0,edges[(i+1)%N].h0);
41
link(edges[(i+1)%N].h1,edges[i].h1);
42
}
43
kernel.set_last(fid, edges[N-1].h0);
44
45
return fid;
46
}
Listing 3.5: The old add_face function
This function creates two unnecessary vectors, and presumably the caller has to make
one as well. After staring at this for quite a few hours, and with some help from C++20
ranges and functional programming concepts, I wrote a version that has zero allocations,
seen below. The main idea was to separate the algorithm into a starting, finishing and
intermediate steps and perform a fold over the intermediate steps.
1
template <std::ranges::viewable_range Range>
2
FaceID Manifold::add_face(Range&& points)
3
{
4
const FaceID fid = kernel.add_face();
5
6
struct FoldState {
7
HalfEdgeID h0;
8
HalfEdgeID h1;
9
VertexID v0;
10
};
11
12
// add half-edges and vertex to connectivity kernel , sets position of
vertex
13
auto create_edge = [this](const Manifold::Vec& point) {
14
const auto temp = FoldState{
15
.h0 = kernel.add_halfedge(),
16
.h1 = kernel.add_halfedge(),
17
.v0 = kernel.add_vertex(),
26
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:35==
18
};
19
pos(temp.v0) = point;
20
return temp;
21
};
22
23
// glue half-edges together , sets their faces
24
auto setup_edge = [this, fid](const FoldState& f) {
25
this->glue(f.h0, f.h1);
26
27
kernel.set_face(f.h0, fid);
28
kernel.set_face(f.h1, InvalidFaceID);
29
};
30
31
// link half-edges together , sets their vertices and outgoing half-edges
32
auto link_successive_edges = [this](const FoldState& prev, const FoldState
& next) {
33
link(prev.h0, next.h0);
34
link(next.h1, prev.h1);
35
36
kernel.set_vert(prev.h1, prev.v0);
37
kernel.set_vert(prev.h0, next.v0);
38
kernel.set_out(next.v0, prev.h1);
39
};
40
41
// we manually do the work for the first half-edge pair and only fold over
points[1..]
42
const FoldState first = create_edge(*std::ranges::begin(points));
43
const auto last =
44
fold(points | std::views::drop(1), first,
45
[this, setup_edge , link_successive_edges]
46
(const Manifold::Vec& p1, const FoldState& state) -> FoldState {
47
const auto next = FoldState{
48
.h0 = kernel.add_halfedge(),
49
.h1 = kernel.add_halfedge(),
50
.v0 = kernel.add_vertex(),
51
};
52
pos(next.v0) = p1;
53
54
setup_edge(state);
55
link_successive_edges(state, next);
56
57
return next;
58
});
59
kernel.set_last(fid, last.h0);
60
setup_edge(last);
61
link_successive_edges(last, first);
62
63
return fid;
64
}
Listing 3.6: The new add_face function.
It does not matter if you call this version of add_face() with only 3 vertices or thousands. It
will continue to work and it will not create any temporary allocations. Ultimately, it might be
unlikely that you are calling this function on multiple Manifolds from multiple threads, but
consider that we make a divide and conquer algorithm that works on multiple Manifolds
and merges them. Suddenly, not having allocations becomes important. An improvement
opens the door for further future improvements.
It also turns out that this design is (predictably) much faster on small Manifolds as seen in
table 3.1. It is also faster on large Manifolds but then you end up being under the mercy of
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
27
==PAGE:36==
other Manifold construction functions that grow asymptotically faster than O(n). It turns
out that the biggest problem is the cleanup function that is called for garbage collection
after stitching added faces as seen in the flamegraph in fig. 3.4a and fig. 3.4b.
Number of vertices
old add_face(ns/vertex)
new add_face(ns/vertex)
100
1,410.52
756.91
10 000
1,451.62
1,218.49
1 000 000
1,369.82
1,131.93
Table 3.1: Performance comparison of constructing a full Manifold in terms of nanosec-
onds taken per vertex (lower is better).
I have actually discussed this with my advisor and while it would also be nice to change
the implementation of cleanup so much larger Manifolds (in the hundreds of millions
of vertices) can be loaded, we decided to focus on areas more important to this project.
Either way, this actually relates to our topic of avoiding allocations since cleanup performs
a lot of allocations (as can be seen in the flamegraphs), in order to move data around
inside the Manifold.
(a) With inlined functions hidden.
(b) With inlined functions shown.
Figure 3.4: Flamegraph of Manifold construction.
3.4.2
The story of C++ associative containers
When I started this project, my thesis advisor Andreas was against including external de-
pendencies in GEL. Although some C++ projects can take avoiding external dependen-
cies to the extreme – the so called ”not invented here syndrome”[31] – there are some
28
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:37==
good reasons to minimize superfluous dependencies. Namely, it can make it more difficult
for downstream users to depend on the library. There are however, a few areas where I
think the potential payoff more than justifies the added maintenance cost. One of those
are associative containers.
The built-in associative containers in C++, std::set, std::unordered_set, std::map, and
std::unordered_map have been criticized for being slow[32]. There are multiple issues
at play here. Firstly, std::set and std::map are somewhat mislabeled. They store their el-
ements in a sorted order which is typically not something that you need in an associative
container, this mislabeling is presumably also the reason why several GEL data structures
used these rather than the unordered counterparts. Being sorted of course means that all
common operations, insertions, searches, and removals take O(log n) time. Even more
disappointingly, the standard puts extremely strict pointer stability requirements which
means that most implementations use red-black trees[32]. Although red-black trees are
asymptotically optimal, they require an individual allocation per node and three pointers,
being enormously wasteful in terms of memory and also being extremely cache unfriendly.
B-trees are a more modern and much more cache friendly alternative but the standard
library implementations cannot use it because it does not have pointer stability for each
element. Things do not get much better with the unordered counterparts. Although they
are once again asymptotically optimal, they retain the pointer stability requirements of
the ordered associative containers. This means that they are typically implemented as
a hash table with doubly linked lists in buckets. This is once again enormously wasteful
in terms of memory and cache unfriendly; std::unordered_set is also incompatible with
standard library algorithm for sets (which I find to be an enormously silly footgun), further
discouraging its use. What most programmers would prefer in a majority of cases is a
straightforward, open addressed hash table and the current most popular implementa-
tion of this idea is Google’s Swisstables as implemented in the abseil library[33]. Since
abseil is a fairly heavy library, we found another one that extends the abseil associative
containers with parallel ones called phmap[34].
Now, I will illustrate just how significant of a difference the associative container imple-
mentation can make by downplaying the result fairly significantly. The rotation system
reconstruction uses associative containers in quite a few places. One in triangulation,
one inside the geometry test, one during normal flipping, one during component splitting,
and one per vertex to store neighbors, but the most important ones are the associative
containers inside the graph. Those will be the only ones that I will replace for this bench-
mark.
1
struct AMGraph {
2
// *snip*
3
4
/// The adjacency map class
5
--- using AdjMap = std::map<NodeID , EdgeID >;
6
+++ using AdjMap = phmap::flat_hash_map <NodeID , EdgeID >;
7
8
// *snip*
9
};
Listing 3.7: Overview of the change in the AMGraph class during this benchmark.
I run the tests on two versions of the Stanford bunny, one smooth with about 34 thousand
vertices and one rough with around 362 thousand vertices. Nearly 1/3 of the runtime for
the latter case is spent on normal estimation which does not use any associative container.
The results can be seen in table 3.2 and fig. 3.5.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
29
==PAGE:38==
Container
Smooth Stanford Bunny (ns/vertex)
Noisy Stanford Bunny (ns/vertex)
phmap::flat_hash_map
33,545.46
83,001.86
phmap::btree_map
36,570.99
85,386.54
std::unordered_map
44,556.83
107,551.57
std::map
47,551.69
114,492.99
Table 3.2: Performance of rotation system reconstruction when changing the associative
container used for the graphs in terms of nanoseconds taken per vertex (Lower is better).
phmap::flat_hash_map phmap::btree_map
std::unordered_map
std::map
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
·105
ns/vertex
Bunny
Large Bunny
Figure 3.5: Performance of rotation system reconstruction when changing the associative
container used for the graphs in terms of nanoseconds per vertex (Lower is better).
For what amounts to a one-line change, we have cut down the runtime of the algorithm by
up to 25%. Even more surprisingly, the B-tree based associative container is much closer
to the performance of the Swiss table than std::unordered_map, despite each operation
being a full log(n) times slower on paper. Of course, as we discussed in section 3.1.2,
memory accesses are not O(1) and with each node in the standard containers being a
separate allocation, it is far more likely to hit the worst case scenario in terms of mem-
ory accesses. And a corollary of this is that std::unordered_map is very unlikely to ever
overtake phmap::btree_map for this specific algorithm because O(log(n)) is much smaller
than O(√n).
This result is so dramatic that I can say that the largest single performance improvement
in this project was achieved in one day, by modifying a handful of lines. And remember,
this understated the performance gain because there are quite a few other places that
rely on associative containers.
It is however important to emphasize that this process is not as simple as just doing a
project wide search and replacing every appearance of std::map with phmap::flat_hash_map.
Consider an algorithm where we are visiting every element of a set and we are draining
the set inside of a loop:
1
void triangulate(
2
std::vector<size_t >& faces,
3
RSGraph& graph,
4
/* snip */)
5
{
6
OrderedSet <NodeID> to_visit;
30
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:39==
7
FacePriorityQueue queue;
8
9
// Init priority queue
10
for (auto i = 0UL; i < graph.no_nodes(); i++) {
11
to_visit.insert(i);
12
}
13
/* snip */
14
while (!to_visit.empty()) {
15
while (!queue.empty()) {
16
std::pair<FaceType , float> item = queue.top();
17
queue.pop();
18
/* snip */
19
const NodeID v_u = item.first[1];
20
const NodeID v_w = item.first[2];
21
/* snip */
22
to_visit.erase(v_u);
23
to_visit.erase(v_w);
24
/* snip */
25
}
26
27
if (!to_visit.empty()) {
28
NodeID pick = *to_visit.begin();
29
to_visit.erase(pick);
30
/* snip */
31
}
32
}
33
}
Listing 3.8:
Greatly simplified version of the triangulation step from rotation system
reconstruction.
Such a case is pathologic for the Swiss table whose open addressed nature can easily
push this seemingly O(n) operation to O(n²). The B-tree based set works really well here
however since most of the popping is just copying data and reassigning some pointers.
The built-in containers have the cheapest operations but you lose more performance due
to being cache unfriendly.
There are also cases where the built-in containers can outperform the high performance
containers. An example is the Manifold cleanup function I mentioned in section 3.4.1.
The important thing here is that while the std associative containers have generally poor
performance, they lack pathological cases where their stated performance guarantees
collapse. I do not personally think this justifies having them be the default containers,
and would have much preferred having them explicitly be labelled std::rb_tree_map,
std::rb_tree_set, std::closed_hash_map, and std::closed_hash_set alongside other
more performance oriented collections. Either way, always benchmark to validate changes.
3.4.3
AttribVec and the Dangers of Copying
The fastest meaningful operation that a CPU can do is the copy10. And copying is done
a lot. Passing data into a function may require copying data into the stack. Returning by
value may also require copying data from one stack frame to the other. Due to how perva-
sive copying can be, a great deal of compiler research has been dedicated to eliminating
as many unnecessary copies as possible to the point that the C++ standard mandates it
in certain circumstances[35]. And it is also a priority that when copies do happen, that
they are as fast as possible.
10Note that an application without any side-effects does no meaningful work, and any application that does
more work than moving data from one place to the other would be strictly slower.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
31
==PAGE:40==
The programmer does have some limited control over copying. C++ retains the pass-
by-value semantics of C but adds references that behave like values but are not copied
when passed. When passing trivially copyable types, the compiler may inline the value,
resulting in identical code generation11. But the general rule of thumb is that plain data
smaller than the register size for the platform should be passed by value. If your pointers
are 8-bytes, then promoting data smaller than 8-byte to a pointer would naturally be pure
overhead. But things are not so clear for larger data. Nearly all modern platforms have
16-byte registers and some 32-byte registers which can be used especially when passing
floating point numbers. In addition, reading through a pointer in some cases might have
a higher overhead than just copying a few extra bytes. This is one of those cases where
these copies did matter.
AttribVec in GEL is a fairly mundane wrapper over std::vector with the main differ-
ence that on an out of bounds access, it resizes the vector to that size and returns a
provided default value12. This provides semantics that are somewhere between a C++
vector and an array. The convenience is that when the AttribVec is used as an auxiliary
data structure to store data based on indices provided from another source, no explicit
resize is required. But this also means that if we hold references into the vector, we can
invalidate them just by accessing the vector. AttribVec weakly guards against this by
only returning by value when using operator[] through const lvalues13. This however
creates a potential hazard if we have to copy a lot of data, or to copy things that generally
should not be copied. As it turns out, we were doing both.
Our protagonist is the RSGraph class that has the following simplified structure:
1
struct Neighbor {
2
/* snip */
3
};
4
5
struct Vertex {
6
Vec3 position;
7
Vec3 normal;
8
std::set<Neighbor > neighbors;
9
/* snip */
10
};
11
12
struct RSGraph: AMGraph {
13
AttribVec <Vertex > vertices;
14
/* snip */
15
};
Listing 3.9: Simplified fields for RSGraph ands its helper structs.
RSGraph contains
vertices and each vertex knows data relating to it and some of its neighbors.
11This can be a problem in some cases because wrappers types such as std::unique_ptr may be forced
into the stack even though they are nothing more than a pointer[36]. But the hardware is also not stupid and
can use forwarding to avoid unnecessary cache trips meaning the actual performance impact will be heavily
context dependent.
12The access needs to be over a non-const lvalue. Else we cannot resize and have to throw.
13I personally do not think that this is a good practice, but ultimately C++ just lacks necessary tools for
compile time lifetime tracking and this likely appeared as an acceptable alternative at the time. See [37] for
further background.
32
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:41==
Now, here is the problem. We frequently need to read the position and normal inside of a
vertex, and we also need to read the neighbors. The following case is fine:
1
auto foo(RSGraph& graph, ...) {
2
Vec3 point = graph.vertices[...].position;
3
// T& operator[](index_t) is called
4
// 24 bytes copied
5
}
Listing 3.10: non-const reference access to graph does not result in copies.
The following case however is not:
1
auto foo(const RSGraph& graph, ...) {
2
Vec3 point = graph.vertices[...].position;
3
// T operator[](index_t) const is called
4
// 24 + 24 + 48 bytes are copied
5
// A 48-byte allocation for EACH element in neighbors is made
6
// And then we immediately call the destructor
7
}
Listing 3.11: const reference access to graph results in copies.
It is hard to overstate just how big of a performance loss this caused. Nearly the entirety of
the non-multithreading related performance improvement after the change of associative
containers came from changing AttribVec to std::vector. It is also a word of caution
against going against language idioms. In this case by making operator[] return by
value. This is also where flamegraphs really show their benefit as seen in fig. 3.6. The
is_intersecting function has no obvious visible allocations. So, alarm bells were go-
ing in my head when I noticed the Vertex constructor is being called which meant the
std::setconstructor is being called which results in a performance catastrophe.
Figure 3.6: Flamegraph of the is_intersecting function showing calls to the allocator that
should not happen.
This change is also responsible for most of the performance difference between the old
rotation system reconstruction implementation after changes to GEL and the new rotation
system reconstruction implementation.
3.4.4
Parallelizing Edge Insertions
Although I did not end up parallelizing them in the end, it is important to discuss why
that is. Out of every single step, edge insertions take the longest in the core algorithm.
They are arguably also the least parallelizable. Let’s take a look at the rotation system
reconstruction algorithm again.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
33
==PAGE:42==
Algorithm 2 An overview of the rotation system reconstruction algorithm.
Input: points : List[R3], normals : List[R3], k : Nat
Output: M : Manifold
Γ : Graph ←knnGraph(points, r, k)
for G : Graph in components(Γ) do
CO ←buildCircularOrdering(G, normals)
MST : Graph ←initMST(G)
(M, RS) ←(MST, buildRS(MST, CO))
Q ←sortEdges(G)
for edge : Edge in Q do
if topologyTest(M, RS, edge) ∧geometryTest(M, RS, edge, θ, points) then
M ←insertEdge(M, edge)
RS ←updateRS(RS, CO, edge)
end if
end for
M ←connectHandle(M, RS, n)
M ←triangulate(M, RS)
M ←outputMesh(M, RS, points)
end for
The inner for loop is the edge insertion step. This appears as a fold operation at first
glance. We perform checks on each edge in our list and then insert it into our graph if
the edge passes the tests. Since the result of the tests depend on the state of the graph
and rotation system, this is not a pure fold. However, that does not mean that it cannot
be parallelized. There are two important observations to be made:
1. An edge insertion will not make failing edges succeed.
2. An edge insertion can only affect subsequent edges inside the same polygon.
I initially only moved based on the first observation. My first idea was to pre-filter the list
of edges and remove all of the failing edges. This does not work very well on its own
because with the initial minimum spanning tree, nearly any edge insertion ends up being
valid. So we end maybe reducing the number of edges we have to check in parallel by
a third. Another problem is the asymmetry between check runtimes. Determining that
an edge passes or fails the topology check is quite fast, but determining if it passes the
geometry test takes some time. I tried first running in serial for the first few collapses.
The problem is, in order to greatly increase the ratio of invalid to valid collapses among
the remaining collapses, you need to perform a lot of collapses. At that point, you may as
well just do everything in serial.
I tried a lockstep execution model where tests are performed in parallel, failing points are
discarded and remaining points after the first success are retested. The problem with
this is that the lockstep model adds too much synchronization overhead especially when
relying on the OS to wake our sleeping threads. So observation 1 is not good enough, we
need to exploit both observations.
It is important to realize that the topology test and the geometry test are not created equal.
The topology test relies significantly more on the global state of the mesh, strictly serial-
izing the execution until the mesh is broken up into sufficient number of polygons where
some form of parallelism might be achieved. The geometry test however is almost en-
tirely local and much more expensive than the topology test. It can be trivially decided
34
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:43==
if two geometry tests are independent by just checking the distance between them. So
a parallelization scheme could have worker threads that perform the geometry check in
parallel and a main thread that feeds the worker threads and performs the topology tests
and edge insertions.
Ultimately, we decided that collapse and re-expansion discussed in chapter 4 was far
more important than getting this done.
3.5
Quantitative Performance Improvements
A summary of the performance improvements based on the test meshes that will be de-
scribed in chapter 5 can be seen in table 3.4. The methodology is described in section 5.1.
The test parameters for the collapse and reconstruction can be seen in table 3.3. These
are the default parameters provided in the rotation system reconstruction paper. For the
smooth Stanford bunny and the high genus mesh, the Euclidean distance function is used,
for the noisy Stanford bunny, tangent space distance is used. The noisy Stanford bunny
runs additionally runs normal estimations which add a substantially amount of time to the
runtimes.
The test setup for the old and new categories is identical and was run through the C++
API. The pygel 6.1 case was tested using the Python API, the smooth Stanford bunny
result is missing because I did not backport the obj parser that I wrote inside GEL. The
difference in performance between pygel 6.1 and the old RSR implementation with our
GEL changes mostly stems from changes to the AMGraph but may also have to do with
the differences in build settings.
parameter
value
k
30
genus
auto-detect
r
20
θ
60°
n
50
Table 3.3: Test parameters for the rotation system reconstruction.
Mesh
Bunny
Noisy Bunny
High Genus
Vertices
34,834
362,272
143,662
ns/vertex
time(s)
ns/vertex
time(s)
ns/vertex
time(s)
pygel 6.1
-
273,761.19
99.18
158,879.45
22.82
Old
107,593.10
3.75
217,211.83
78.69
155,976.55
22.41
New
43,686.32
1.51
88,293.00
31.99
58,597.53
8.42
Table 3.4: Performance results.
Perhaps the more interesting graph is one that showcases the change in runtime with a
change in input size that can be seen in fig. 3.7. The graph is already normalized for input
size, so a flat line would indicate linear complexity.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
35
==PAGE:44==
103.5
104
104.5
105
105.5
0
2
4
6
8
·104
Number of vertices.
ns/vertex
Asymptotic complexity of the new rotation system reconstruction.
Figure 3.7: Asymptotic complexity of the new rotation system reconstruction in ns/vertex.
Lower is better.
There are of course way more changes than what is strictly discussed in this section, but
I think what I wrote here capture the spirit how I made those changes quite well.
36
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:45==
4
Section II - Collapse and Reexpansion
At the start of this project, there were several questions in my head. And the most impor-
tant one was whether the project was underscoped. It could be because we have a certain
level of arrogance when we start a big project such as this; I recall one of my pre-start
discussions with Andreas where I asked about potential GPU acceleration1. However, as
we work on one topic over a long period of time, we get to appreciate the subtlety and
intricate complexity of the topic.
The idea behind the collapse and reexpansion algorithm is simple but the devil is very
much in the details. The basic assumption that underlies this algorithm is, on sufficiently
detailed point clouds, most of the points are redundant and are not important to the topo-
logical description of the mesh. If this assumption holds, then we do not need to have
a very complex reconstruction scheme that performs a lot of checks over a very large
number of points; we can reduce the problem size and then put the points we removed
back into the mesh. In that sense, this is not a complete mesh reconstruction algorithm
but intended as an enhancement of an existing one. Since GEL already contains a mesh
reconstruction algorithm in the form of the rotation system reconstruction[1], that is what
we tried to enhance.
A further question is whether we could improve the quality of the rotation system recon-
struction in some way. Although the rotation system based reconstruction is a very robust
method of converting point clouds to 3D meshes, it is not an algorithm that actually cares
about mesh or triangle quality. This does not mean that it creates poor quality meshes,
1In hindsight, that would have been an incredible amount of work and would effectively require a complete
rewrite of GEL.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
37
==PAGE:46==
rather that it does not use a heuristic that is directly connected to mesh quality when per-
forming the reconstruction. This question turned out to have a very roundabout answer.
The topic of this section is to explore the intricacies of the collapse and reexpansion algo-
rithm. The main idea we have is compressing the input size by eliminating as many points
that we deem as less important, run a robust reconstruction algorithm like RSR, and then
reintroduce all of the points that we removed.
4.1
Motivation
Our main motivation is one of simplicity. Although the rotation system reconstruction
method is very robust, it relies on global information which is complicated and expensive
to keep track of for a very large mesh. Especially for meshes where each vertex carries
relatively little information, we could reduce the problem size and then reintroduce the
meshes based on a local metric. If inserting each edge is substantially cheaper than with
the rotation system reconstruction, we can gain a lot of extra performance.
Another problem is that the rotation system reconstruction is difficult to parallelize. It has
multiple steps which are all parallelization unfriendly and has a lot of non-uniformity in
terms of each step. If we could reduce this to just a collapse and a reexpansion, this
could enable future parallelization.
Another concern is the asymptotic complexity. The rotation system reconstruction has
several poor worst case bounds that we might rather avoid. Although memory effects
discussed in section 3.1.2 prevent us from presenting a purely linear algorithm in practice,
it would be nice if we had an algorithm that is or can be made much more cache friendly.
Finally, the rotation system reconstruction can end up leaving many gaps inside the recon-
structed mesh. Reducing its input size means that it would have to reconstructed fewer
vertices and thus might leave fewer gaps which might improve final reconstruction quality.
4.2
Quality Measures
How do you measure if a reconstruction is good quality? This is a question that I somewhat
struggled with from the beginning of the project. The RSR paper uses two quantitative
measures.
Ratio of reconstructed vertices rv = |Vmesh|
|Vpc|
(higher is better). Since the goal of combi-
natorial methods is to keep the same set of points as opposed to volumetric methods[3],
we would like to keep as many of the points as possible. However, this is not an open and
shut measure. Namely, any good combinatorial method should be able to keep nearly
all of the points, which is definitely the case for the rotation system based reconstruc-
tion. However, there might be outlier points that do not have any other nearby points
with which they can form nice triangles. The rotation system reconstruction already filters
those points.
Number of boundary edges |Eb| (lower is better). If we did not care about the presence
of boundaries, we could just use the rotation system reconstruction up to the minimum
spanning tree step, add a single polygon comprising of every edge on the tree, and call
it a day. Of course, the problem is people tend to prefer watertight meshes (ones without
any boundary edges[38]).
38
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:47==
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
Figure 4.1: Boundary edges of a disk manifold.
So, assuming the point cloud represents a watertight surface, an optimal reconstruction
would have no boundary edges. There are however some cases where the surface is not
watertight and we want the reconstruction to keep the disk-like topology. There might also
be other cases where the object is watertight but the point cloud is not (which includes
the Stanford bunny). In such cases, some sort of ”hole filling” might be desirable.
The rotation system reconstruction relies heavily on accurate normal estimation to achieve
a much lower number of boundary edges than competing methods.
In addition to these, there are several other important measures that I identified.
Self intersections. (fewer is better). Surfaces in the real world do not intersect them-
selves, so a reconstructed mesh should generally avoid self intersections. There are how-
ever two important details. First is that this measure must be balanced against the number
of boundary edges since a reconstruction might avoid adding faces that would cause in-
tersections. The second much more important detail is that mathematical manifolds are
allowed to self intersect, and one of the strengths of the rotation system reconstruction is
that it can handle self intersecting meshes as long as points are clearly disambiguated by
their normals2. I did not consider self intersecting meshes during this project, although it
could be argued that our particular collapse method could be able to handle these.
Due to the relative complexity of actually measuring the number of self intersections, I
avoided using this measure quantitatively.
Triangle minimum angles. (Larger (closer to 60°) is better). The minimum angle of a
triangle can be used as a simple measure of how ”pretty” the triangle is. Given the same
topology, triangles that are more equilateral will result in more regular geometry. It is worth
keeping in mind though that minimum angles do not care about the overall topology of the
mesh and maintaining the surface might result in some poor quality triangles.
Nevertheless, this was still a somewhat useful heuristic when working on the reexpansion.
Vertex valency. (closer to 6 is better). The valency is the number of edges that originate
from a vertex, in other words the number of vertices in a vertex’s one-ring as seen in
fig. 4.2.
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
Figure 4.2: Vertex u has a valency of 6.
2However, it cannot handle non-orientable manifolds. Neither can any other method that I am aware of.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
39
==PAGE:48==
Although having an abundance of vertices with very low or very large valencies can indi-
cate potential topological issues, the valency by itself tells very little about mesh quality.
In addition, we are making the assumption that there is a nice and uniform3 distribution of
vertices.
Dihedral angles. (lower is better). The dihedral angle is the angle between the normal
vector of two neighboring faces. The dihedral angle is visualized in fig. 4.3. In contrast to
the triangle minimum angle, the dihedral angle tends to inform about the overall quality of
the topology.
v1
v4
v2
v3
n1
n1
n2
n2
θ
Figure 4.3: The dihedral angle between the face containing vertices v2, v1, v3 and the
other face containing vertices v1, v2, v4 is shown.
In addition to the angle, we can multiply the angle with the shared edge length to normalize
as in section 4.2 as described in[39].
||v1 −v2|| arccos(n1 · n2)
(4.1)
A downside of using dihedral angles is that it suggests that the optimal is a maximally flat
manifold with no distinctive features. However, being able to maintain sharp features of a
manifold surface is a desirable property of reconstruction.
In summary, every quantifiable quality measure is flawed at least in some way, which
makes it more understandable that qualitative analysis is so common within geometry
processing.
4.3
Algorithm Description
The collapse and reexpansion are done in three steps. During the collapse, we take
the provided point coordinates and normals, and produce an ordered list of collapses in
addition to the remaining coordinates and normals. The remainder need not be part of
the initial point cloud set. More specifically, it can be processed in such a way to im-
prove the reconstruction quality. In the reconstruction step, we feed these coordinates
and normals to a reconstruction algorithm, in this case the rotation system reconstruc-
tion[1] which produces a Manifold. In the reexpansion step, we go in the reverse order
of the collapses reinserting all of the points that were removed and updating the location
of existing points. The collapse and reexpansion steps are coupled in the sense that if
the reexpansion needs particular information at the time of a particular expansion, the
3Not in the random sense, but in the sense of being approximately the same distance away from their
one-ring.
40
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:49==
information needs to be stored by the collapse first. The collapse and reexpansion are
also tightly coupled to the reconstruction step because the collapse is highly influential
in the quality of the reconstruction (especially because we are giving the reconstruction
fewer points to work with which can make its life more difficult), and the success of the re-
expansion step is heavily dependent on a good reconstruction step. A top level overview
of the algorithm can be seen in algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 An overview of the collapse and reexpansion algorithm.
Input: P : List[R3], N : List[R3]„ params : . . .
Output: M : Manifold,
(collapses, (P′, N ′)) ←collapse(P, N, params)
M′ ←reconstruct(P′, N ′, params)
M ←reexpand(M′, collapses, params)
There are a few other important top level details. Firstly, our collapse phase is dependent
on accurate normals just like the rotation system reconstruction algorithm, so normal es-
timation for empty normal inputs has been moved to the top level. Our collapse already
outputs an estimated normal for each remaining vertex which is given to the rotation sys-
tem reconstruction. Since the collapse is likely to relax a mesh, the parameters to be given
to the rotation system reconstruction for an optimal reconstruction are also different.
4.4
Collapse
During the collapse step, we take the point cloud, assign every vertex a quadric error
metric (QEM)[6] given the provided normal, build a k-nearest neighbors graph using the
vertex coordinates, and populate a priority queue of the edges based on the QEM error
multiplied by the edge length. We then dequeue this priority queue based on input pa-
rameters and collapse one edge per iteration. The collapsed edge is removed from the
graph. We remove the invalidated edges from the priority queue and enqueue all of the
edges of the collapsed vertex. We repeat this process for the specified number of times.
Information about each collapse that is relevant to the reexpansion is saved and provided
as output. An overview of the collapse step can be seen in algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 An overview of the collapse phase.
Input: P : List[R3], N : List[R3], k : Nat, maxIter : Nat
Output: collapses : List[Edge], P′ : List[R3], N ′ : List[R3]
Γ : Graph ←knnGraph(P, r, k)
Q : PriorityQueue ←initQueue(Γ, N)
for i : Nat in [0..maxIter) do
(e : Edge, Q) ←pop(Q)
(Γ, Q) ←collapseEdge(Γ, Q, e)
collapses ←listAppend(collapses, e)
end for
(P′, N ′) ←remaining(Γ, Q)
The collapse step is what makes or breaks this algorithm. Based on the argument from
section 2.1.1, we can hypothetically achieve our desired mesh from nearly any point, but
this does not count for much if we dig ourselves to such a hole that there is no straight-
forward way out.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
41
==PAGE:50==
4.4.1
Quadric Error Metrics
Quadric error metrics were initially developed as a flexible method of mesh simplifica-
tion[6] however, they have also been used for point cloud to mesh reconstruction[40].
The main idea is to fit a bunch of quadric planes to each point.
Given a point p with the normal n, the plane quadric can be computed like in eq. (4.2).
Although the quadric is a 4x4 matrix, it is symmetric, requiring only 10 numbers to be
stored in practice.
Qp = (nx, ny, nz, −n · pT )T · (nx, ny, nz, −n · pT )
(4.2)
The neat part about quadrics is the sum of two quadrics is another quadric as in eq. (4.3).
Q′ = Q1 + Q2
(4.3)
We can calculate the cost of having a certain vertex given a quadric with the relatively
simple eq. (4.4).
eQ(v) = vT Qv
(4.4)
We have the option of choosing where we want to place the collapsed point. It is possible
to use simple heuristics like the average v′ = 1
2(v1, v2) or a weighted average. It is also
possible to calculate optimal position that minimizes the error directly with eq. (4.5).
vopt = Q−1 · (0, 0, 0, 1)
(4.5)
GEL already provides this functionality built-in. To take the inverse, the eigen decompo-
sition of Q is performed. Even when there are not enough linearly independent eigen-
vectors, an orthogonal basis can be calculated given 1 or 2 eigenvectors, allowing a least
squares solution to be calculated4.
QEMs work because they inherently give us collapses that avoid destabilizing the general
topology. This means that a collapse that crosses a sharp feature will typically not be
performed due to large QEM error. But a collapse between vertices on the same sharp
feature might be possible. Our general hope is that such collapses are performed later
(and thus the reexpansion earlier) where they will likely be the least disruptive to the overall
topology and provide us a better base to work with during the reexpansion phase.
There are however some things we need to be careful about. Firstly, we need to take the
edge length into account when calculating the error because QEMs are agnostic to scale.
This can be easily achieved by multiplying the edge length. The second more subtle
problem is that we need to clamp the error value from the QEM to a minimum value. To
understand why, consider a graph as seen in fig. 4.4 where each vertex has approximately
the same normal.
In such a situation, the QEM error is going to take a very low numerical value for all of the
edges. These values may all be much lower than 1 but may still vary by large orders of
magnitude which will dominate when they are multiplied with the edge length which will
vary significantly less. However, in such cases, the shortest edge will typically be the best
4All non-zero symmetric matrices have at least one non-zero eigenvalue.
42
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:51==
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
Figure 4.4: A connectivity diagram. If all of these vertices are in the same plane, the QEM
can cause numerical issues.
collapse. As a result, the actual error function that is used is shown in eq. (4.6) where ϵ
(epsilon) is some small positive number.
||e|| max(eQ(v), ϵ)
(4.6)
The decimation use case for QEMs shown in [6] does not have these problems because
they start with the actual connectivity information of the mesh where each vertex is only
connected to its one ring and not just an arbitrary number of vertices that are close; ad-
ditionally, each vertex is initialized with the QEMs of all of their surrounding triangles, this
tends to make each QEM more numerically stable. We cannot do this because we do not
know the actual connectivity of the mesh.
The disadvantage of QEMs is that they take a significant amount of memory and cal-
culating the optimal position through them is fairly expensive due to the required eigen-
decomposition5. One might wonder why we do not simply use the shortest edge. The
answer is that we want to discourage collapses that will eliminate sharp features from the
mesh. Nevertheless, I do not believe QEMs are the best method of doing this. We are
not taking advantage of them fully and they are relatively performance heavy for what
they offer. They are here as they have been part of the design for a few months and they
were initially important in terms of bringing the quality of the reconstruction from poor to
almost usable, but a future iteration might eliminate them completely. We will talk about
this when we see tuning of the ϵ parameter in section 5.3.
4.4.2
Implementation Notes
In the implementation of the collapse, the number of collapses to be performed is taken
as two separate parameters in the form of the number of iterations (meant to be a small
cardinal number), and the collapse factor per iteration. For example, if the number of
iterations is 2 and the collapse factor is 0.6, we will be left with only 16% of the vertices
after the two iterations. Right now, this does nothing but the intention was to leave some
room for parallelization.
Due to the relatively high computational cost of estimating the optimal point for a QEM, this
is only performed when actually doing the collapse since in nearly all cases, the optimal
point falls more or less at the center of the collapsed edge. This optimization resulted in a
minor quality loss when I initially implemented it, but later changes made QEMs less and
less important in terms of quality. I very much suspect that if we were to further improve
the collapse state, we would most likely get rid of QEMs for a measure that is a bit closer
to what we want to approximate that is leaner in terms of performance.
Unlike the rotation system reconstruction where a large number of neighbors may be
required to keep the quality up, we only want a small number of neighbors to initialize the
5I am aware that the matrix is merely 4x4 and symmetric, but the alternative is literally just adding up two
vectors and dividing the total by 2. When you have to calculate this tens of thousands of times, these really
add up.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
43
==PAGE:52==
graph. This is because we want to collapse edges in the one-ring in nearly all cases and
the one-ring is comprised of the closest vertices in most cases. The one-ring also typically
only has 4-8 vertices and since we typically end up with more edges on a vertex after a
collapse, we only typically need to start with 4-8 vertices. The performance and quality
implications of the number of initial vertices is explored in section 5.3.
An ordinary priority queue only allows items to be removed from the front of the queue. To
avoid this limitation, the collapse queue uses a B-tree and a separate error cache. When
we perform a collapse, we remove the stale error values from the B-tree and insert new
ones.
4.5
Re-expansion
During the reexpansion phase, we perform vertex split operations in the reverse order of
the collapses until we have no more reexpansions to make. However, unlike the collapse
step where we are somewhat limited in terms of what we can do and mainly rely on a
good heuristic, we have to balance a lot of different needs. The summary of the algorithm
can be seen in algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 An overview of the reexpansion phase.
Input: collapses : List[Edge]
InOut: M : Manifold
for e : Edge in listReverse(collapses) do
(v1, v2, v′) ←e
M ←flipCrossedEdgeMaybe(M, v′)
(ein, eout) ←findSplitCanidate(M, v1, v2, v′)
(M, vnew) ←vertexSplit(M, ein, eout)
M ←optimizeNeighborhood(M, vnew)
end for
This glosses over a lot of details but before we address why we need quite a few steps to
perform the reexpansion, let us address what a vertex split is. A vertex split is visualized
in fig. 4.5. In the ideal scenario, the one-ring of the vertex being split form a plane and the
coordinates we saved from the collapse phase both fall inside the one-ring. These are
also sufficiently far away from the other vertices in the one-ring and we have two edges
that are fairly perpendicular to the axis of the split, and all of the resulting triangles are
nearly equilateral.
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
sliced edges
(a) Before split.
uold
unew
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
new edges
sliced edges
(b) After split.
Figure 4.5: A vertex split. A split is performed over two incident edges of a vertex. The
edges must be unique. When a split is performed, two new triangles are created along
the participating edges.
Now, of course no matter how much we may wish that our life were so easy, some of
44
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:53==
these end up being violated in practice. The most important problem is an edge crossing
seen in fig. 4.6. This happens when a reexpansion causes one or both of the expanded
vertices to cross the plane normal to an edge.
uold
unew
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
new edges
sliced edges
Figure 4.6: A reexpansion that results in an edge crossing.
It is important to note that in such a scenario, no choice of split would have saved us.
So, we need to use our second tool, the edge flip, depicted in fig. 4.7. The point of the
crossed edge check is to determine if a reexpansion would result in crossed edges and
thus degenerate geometry and prevent this preemptively. We do this by ray tracing the
expansion and checking if it intersects with a cone slice that starts from around the edge.
The cone slice starts a bit earlier than the edge and thus we flip even if we do not cross
the edge but merely get close to it. The flip is otherwise unconditional and only checks
for legality. The goal is to maximize the chances that the next step produces a good edge
split.
v4
v3
v2
v1
(a) Before flip.
v4
v3
v2
v1
(b) After flip.
Figure 4.7: An edge flip. Flipping a long edge can result in more relaxed triangles.
4.5.1
Choosing the Edge Split
When designing the algorithm for choosing the edge, the goal was to come up with a single
”badness” measure to choose the optimal split. This measure should be smooth, local,
and quick to calculate. Out of the measures we discussed in section 4.2, dihedral angles
and minimum angles fit the bill. Ratio of reconstructed vertices and boundary edges are
global measures6. Self intersections are both global and expensive to calculate. Vertex
valency is not smooth. This leaves dihedral angles and minimum angles. An overview of
the algorithm can be seen in algorithm 6.
6It is possible to stitch some edges in this stage if there are two vertices sharing the same position that
were not stitched during Manifold construction. When we expand a vertex, we create a new edge between
two vertices as seen in fig. 4.5b. However, depending on how the collapse occurred, the split might end up
creating very nasty geometry and we need to have a more robust optimization stage to compensate.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.8: Dihedral angle loss functions
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
Angle (π radians)
Loss
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
1 0
0.5
1
0
1
2
|e|| arccos(θ)|
We calculate the dihedral angles between every neighboring triangle pair and the mini-
mum angles for every triangle that would partake in the reexpansion as seen in fig. 4.5b.
And pick the pair that minimizes the combination of these metrics. In addition, there is
some additional thresholding to avoid triangles with extremely acute angles and very large
dihedral angles if a split that does not suffer from these is available. The idea here is that
subpar local topology might be fairly easy to improve through some local geometry opti-
mization scheme while degenerate geometry such as flipped faces might be much more
problematic.
Out of these two, dihedral angles are far more important to the overall reconstruction since
they depend on the topology. This can be seen in fig. 4.9a where no dihedral angles are
used which results in highly degenerate geometry with a ton of overlapping faces. On the
other hand, fig. 4.9b while by no means perfect, indicates that the general mesh can mostly
be kept sane even when ignoring minimum angles. Figure 4.10 shows an expansion with
both without the minimum angle based optimization.
Algorithm 6 Choosing the best edges.
Input: M : Manifold, v′, v1, v2 : V ertex
Output: ein, eout : Edge
E ←incidentEdges(M, v′)
for (ein, eout) in {(e1, e2) ∈E × E ∧(e1 ̸= e2)} do
return (ein, eout) that minimizes
dihedralCost(Mv1,v2split through (ein, eout))
+
angleCost(Mv1,v2split through (ein, eout))
end for
4.5.2
Optimization
As it turns out, just these two operations on their own are not enough to provide a satis-
factory reconstruction. It is difficult to identify a clear reason for this as there are many
individual causes that causes the mesh to degenerate over many reexpansions which cu-
mulatively reduce the quality. This is not a problem with the rotation system reconstruction
because it starts with all of the vertices and inserts edges one by one, skipping if that edge
would degenerate the mesh, potentially leaving gaps within the reconstruction; edges are
inserted from shortest to longest and the lengths of existing edges are unaffected. We
46
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:55==
(a) The smooth Stanford bunny reexpanded
using only the minimum angle metric.
(b) The smooth Stanford bunny reexpanded
using only the dihedral angle metric.
Figure 4.9: Stanford bunnies reconstructed with only partial information.
have neither luxuries. We insert vertices, not edges and skipping a vertex means any
future reexpansion that depends on that vertex becomes impossible. Vertex splits also
change the length of some surrounding edges. So, we need something extra.
The assumption here is that at any point during the reconstruction, there exists a state of
the mesh that is relatively sane. Since each vertex split inserts a single vertex and (ideally)
each of these inserted vertices only affect their immediate neighborhood, we should be
able to perform some optimization to prevent the mesh from degenerating. The algorithm
we use is fairly mundane. We collect the edges in the one ring of the vertex(fig. 4.11a),
outer ring of the vertex(fig. 4.11b), and even further out(fig. 4.11c), sort them from longest
to shortest, and then flip them if the flip does not degenerate the mesh and one of the
triangles participating in the flip has a sufficiently low minimum angle. In practice, just
optimizing the one-ring and outer-ring provides good results and after 1 iteration, we run
into diminishing returns.
A cleverer optimization method can perhaps provide better results, but if the tradeoff is
much longer runtime, such an algorithm would have to justify itself by addressing specific
problems that the current mix of edge split plus naive edge flips cannot solve. An example
of a complete reexpansion can be seen in fig. 4.12.
4.5.3
Implementation Notes
One problem for the reexpansion is we need to figure out a mapping between the col-
lapse information we have and the indexes for the points in the Manifold. Although I
initially looked into recording the index-coordinate relationships within the reconstruction
phase, this turned out to be overly complicated. This phase removes duplicate vertices,
may remove vertices that cannot be reconstructed, and partitions the mesh during re-
construction which necessarily changes the indices. Having to keep track of all of this is
simultaneously really complicated and does not provide us with much of a performance
improvement because a simple hashing scheme to map the coordinates we have to the
indices in the Manifold works fine enough.
Another area of complexity is that it is possible for multiple points within the Manifold
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.10: The smooth Stanford bunny reexpanded without any optimization. Some
topological issues have accumulated in the form of lopsided triangles.
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
(a) One ring of a vertex.
u
v1
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
(b) Outer ring of a vertex.
u
v1
v8
v9
v10
v11
v12
v7
v6
v5
v4
v3
v2
(c) Even further out...
Figure 4.11: The local neighborhood of a vertex.
to share the same coordinate. This can especially happen during the stitching of the
Manifold during reconstruction which skips stitching vertices that would create a non-
manifold situation. Although we explicitly check for multiple points sharing the same coor-
dinate, we do not handle this situation, simply expanding using the first point. This could
be addressed in the future by specifically picking boundary edges for the reexpansion of
both vertices, then stitching the edge that is created as a result.
4.6
Ideas for parallelizing collapse and reexpand
One thing that was not done during the span of this thesis is parallelizing the collapse and
reexpansion process. I mainly attribute this to a lack of time. If the quality of the collapse-
reexpansion method was not good enough, allocating time to parallelize it would be largely
pointless. So, since we spent so much time exploring different strategies and the design
kept changing so frequently, there was little motivation to parallelize any particular design
most of the time.
This does not mean however that I did not think about how our algorithm would be par-
allelized. This parallelization strategy relies on two facts. The first is that unlike the edge
insertions of the rotation system reconstruction, the collapse does not rely on upholding
any global property throughout the mesh. The second is that the collapse is performed in
iterations.
The basic algorithm is as follows. First, we partition the mesh into components depending
on how much parallelism we have. Then each component is collapsed separately. Then
48
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.12: The smooth Stanford bunny reconstructed using the collapse and reexpand
method.
we recombine the components. There are some additional requirements that we must
meet. The first is that we cannot collapse the boundary vertices, which are defined by
vertices that have an edge to another component. The second is that we need multiple
iterations and change how we partition the mesh in each iteration to ensure that vertices
are evenly collapsed throughout the mesh. Assuming we can perform partitioning reason-
ably fast with good distribution, the quality should not be all that different than the single
threaded case. One tricky part is we need to save and restore the pre-existing edges in
between each iteration or recalculate them. It is hard to say which of these options would
offer superior performance or quality.
The reexpansion is more complicated. The main problem is that the expansion is done
on a Manifold which is not a concurrent data structure. Although different Manifolds can
be merged (at some expense), there is no straightforward way of splitting Manifolds, so
we need to be a little more clever. One observation is that the operations that would be
performed by different workers are effectively unaliased, so as long as their respective
ordering is preserved, it might be possible for worker threads to send a list of operations
that they performed which will be ”replayed” by a main thread. The main challenges is that
this would use a lot of memory if each thread has its own copy of the Manifold. Another
challenge would be that each thread would quickly diverge in terms of the indices of the
newly added vertices and halfedges. However, this can be worked around by sending in
coordinates instead and having the main thread figure out the index. In addition, indices
below a certain number would be stable and can be directly passed. Even with the extra
work the main thread would have to do, there is likely significant parallelization that can
be exploited.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
49
==PAGE:58==
Algorithm 7 An overview of the parallel collapse phase.
Input: P : List[R3], N : List[R3], k : Nat, maxIter : Nat
Output: collapses : List[List[Edge]], P′ : List[R3], N ′ : List[R3]
Γ : Graph ←knnGraph(P, r, k)
for i : Nat in [0..maxIter) do
collapses′ ←[]
Γ′ : Graph ←partitionGraph(Γ)
Q : PriorityQueue ←initQueue(Γ′, N)
(e : Edge, Q) ←pop(Q)
(Γ, Q) ←collapseEdge(Γ′, Q, e)
collapses′ ←listAppend(collapses, e)
Γ ←joinGraph(Γ′)
collapses ←joinCollapses(collapses′)
end for
(P′, N ′) ←remaining(Γ, Q)
Algorithm 8 An overview of the parallel reexpansion phase.
Input: collapses : List[List[Edge]]
InOut: M : Manifold
for c : List[Edge] in listReverse(collapses) do
M′ ←M
for e : Edge in listReverse(c) do
(v1, v2, v′) ←e
M′ ←flipCrossedEdgeMaybe(M′, v′)
(ein, eout) ←findSplitCanidate(M′, v1, v2, v′)
(M′, vnew) ←vertexSplit(M′, ein, eout)
M′ ←optimizeNeighborhood(M′, vnew)
end for
M ←replayChanges(M′)
end for
50
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:59==
5
Results
We will look at results across three meshes. Two of these are variations of the famous
Stanford bunny[41]. Marc Levoy who co-authored the original paper where the Stanford
bunny appeared[42] advises against using these for the purposes of mesh reconstruction
due to not constituting a realistic point set. Although this observation is correct, its ubiquity
makes it interesting on its own. The second variant is a noisy variant with the original
point coordinates. What makes this interesting is the quality being rather poor due to
being a very old scan, yet the rotation system reconstruction (RSR) is able to create a
very good mesh. The third mesh is the ”high genus 1” mesh from the RSR paper[1]. This
is a synthetic high genus mesh that is more topologically interesting than the Stanford
bunny and has both sharp and smooth sections. A summary of properties can be seen in
table 5.1 and the meshes in fig. 5.1.
Mesh
Bunny
Noisy Bunny
High Genus
Vertices
34,834
362,272
143,662
Normals included
Yes
No
Yes
Noisy
No
Yes
No
Topologically complex
No
No
Yes
Table 5.1: Short characteristic summary of the test meshes.
(a) Smooth Stanford bunny.
(b) Noisy Stanford Bunny.
(c) High Genus 1.
Figure 5.1: The three test meshes.
5.1
Methodology
All benchmarks in this report are performed on an ASUS TUF A16 laptop with a Ryzen
7 7735HS, an RX 7600S, 16GiB of RAM and a 4GiB swap file. The operating system
used is Ubuntu 24.04 LTS with the 6.11.0-21-generic kernel. The compiler version used
is GCC 13.4 which is the default compiler available in this version of Ubuntu.
All of the performance figures are provided in terms of nanoseconds per vertex meaning
they are already normalized for the number of vertices. The quality measures used are
ratio of reconstructed vertices and number of boundary edges shown on the tables, mir-
roring the RSR paper. As well as the sum of dihedral angle and minimum angle costs.
These are not comparable across meshes and are in separate plots.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
51
==PAGE:60==
The input parameters for the rotation system reconstruction are kept at the default values
shown in table 5.2. When reconstructing purely with the rotation system reconstruction,
the smooth Stanford bunny and high genus 1 use Euclidean distances while the noisy
Stanford bunny use tangent space distances. When using the collapse and reexpansion
method, the RSR uses Euclidean distances for all three meshes, but the smoothing and
normal estimation step uses tangent space distances for the noisy Stanford bunny.
parameter
value
k
30
genus
auto-detect
r
20
θ
60°
n
50
Table 5.2: Test parameters for the rotation system reconstruction.
Our collapse and reexpansion algorithm also has some parameters which we will exam-
ine. I should note that these are not input parameters in the same way as those of RSR.
The RSR parameters are meant to be adjusted based on the characteristics of the mesh
to achieve the best reconstruction. Many of the parameters for collapse and reexpansion
may be changed, simplified, or inferred on the behalf of the user in future iterations. The
parameters used for the collapse and reexpansion are uniform between the three meshes
with the exception of the default number of collapse iterations, which was 3 for the smooth
Stanford bunny, 5 for the noisy Stanford bunny, and 4 for High Genus 1.
• Number of iterations (default: variable) At each iteration, we remove about half of
the vertices. So, two iterations would leave 25% of the vertices, 4 iterations would
leave 6.25% of the vertices, and so on.
• initial neighbors (default: 5) How many neighbors to initialize the collapse graph.
Large numbers are usually not needed.
• epsilon (ϵ) (default: 1.0) The minimum error that the QEM will be clamped to. Too
small values can cause numerical issues. Large values will make the collapse more
like shortest edge first.
• Minimum angle factor (default: 1.0) How much to consider minimum angles when
selecting the vertex split candidates. At 0, the split is entirely based on dihedral
angles.
• Minimum angle threshold (default: 3°) Disallows a vertex split if any triangle would
have a lower minimum angle than this. Can prevent some degenerate geometry.
• Refinement angle (default: 22.5°) During the optimization phase, an edge will be
flipped if its surrounding triangles have an angle lower than this (and the flip is legal).
• Refinement iterations (default: 1) How many times the optimization process is
performed after each split.
5.2
Performance
The performance results with the collapse reexpansion can be seen on table 5.3. The
collapse and reexpansion algorithm reduces the runtime by some 30% but this is relatively
52
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:61==
unsubstantial compared to the performance benefit of the rotation system reconstruction
improvements.
Mesh
Bunny
Noisy Bunny
High Genus
Vertices
34,834
362,272
143,662
ns/vertex
time(s)
ns/vertex
time(s)
ns/vertex
time(s)
pygel 6.1
-
-
273,761.19
99.18
158,879.45
22.82
Old
107,593.10
3.75
217,211.83
78.69
155,976.55
22.41
New
43,686.32
1.51
88,293.00
31.99
58,597.53
8.42
Collapsed
36,403.35
1.27
62,695.23
22.71
38,454.95
5.52
Table 5.3: Performance results.
5.3
Parameter Tuning
Model name
Smooth Bunny
Noisy Bunny
High Genus
|V |
34,834
362,272
143,662
iterations
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
0
1
76
0.999997
175
1
20
1
37
0.998465
7218
30
2
16
0.999349
2193
0
3
13
0.999879
375
0
4
8
0.999992
55
0
5
3
0.999992
28
123
6
4
0.999997
16
111
7
5
0.999997
21
103
initial neighbors
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
4
1
12
0.999994
18
1
0
6
13
0.999997
18
10
8
13
0.999994
22
10
10
13
0.999997
24
10
12
13
0.999997
24
10
ϵ
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
0
1
11
0.999752
259
1
52
10−12
11
0.999752
239
52
10−8
10
0.999672
133
52
10−4
13
0.999992
17
62
10−2
13
0.999992
17
50
1
13
0.999992
17
0
10
13
0.999992
17
10
angle factor
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
0
1
13
0.999992
17
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
4
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
53
==PAGE:62==
angle threshold
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
-1
1
13
0.999992
17
1
0
0
1
2
3
5
10
15
refinement angle
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
0
1
13
0.999992
17
1
0
5
10
15
22.5
30
45
refinement iterations
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
rv
Eb
0
1
13
0.999992
17
1
0
1
2
3
4
Table 5.4: Ratio of reconstructed vertices and number of boundary edges for the three
test meshes.
The dihedral and minimum angle costs for different parameters can be seen below.1 For
each graph, lower is better.
1I am never using pgfplots again, this was the worst.
54
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:63==
Collapse Iterations
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
5
10
15
Iterations
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
100
200
300
Iterations
Noisy Bunny
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
1
2
3
·104
Iterations
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
20
40
60
Iterations
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
50
100
150
Iterations
Noisy Bunny
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
2
4
6
8
·104
Iterations
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
Collapse initial neighbors
4
6
8
10 12
0
5
10
15
Init. Neighbors
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
4
6
8
10 12
0
100
200
300
Init. Neighbors
Noisy Bunny
4
6
8
10 12
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
·104
Init. Neighbors
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
4
6
8
10 12
0
20
40
60
Init. Neighbors
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
4
6
8
10 12
0
50
100
150
Init. Neighbors
Noisy Bunny
4
6
8
10 12
0
2
4
6
8 ·104
Init. Neighbors
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
55
==PAGE:64==
Epsilon
0
5
10
15
ϵ
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0
200
400
ϵ
Noisy Bunny
0
1
2
·104
ϵ
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0
20
40
60
ϵ
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0
100
200
ϵ
Noisy Bunny
0
2
4
6
8 ·104
ϵ
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
Minimum angle factor
0
1
2
4
0
5
10
15
Angle factor
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0
1
2
4
0
100
200
300
Angle factor
Noisy Bunny
0
1
2
4
0
1
2
·104
Angle factor
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0
1
2
4
0
20
40
60
Angle factor
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0
1
2
4
0
50
100
150
200
Angle factor
Noisy Bunny
0
1
2
4
0
2
4
6
8
·104
Angle factor
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
56
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:65==
Minimum angle threshold
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
Angle threshold
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0
5
10
15
0
100
200
300
Angle threshold
Noisy Bunny
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
·104
Angle threshold
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0
5
10
15
0
20
40
60
Angle threshold
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
Angle threshold
Noisy Bunny
0
5
10
15
0
2
4
6
8
·104
Angle threshold
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
Maximum refinement angle
0
22.5
45
0
10
20
Refinement angle
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0
22.5
45
0
100
200
300
400
Refinement angle
Noisy Bunny
0
22.5
45
0
1
2
3
·104
Refinement angle
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0
22.5
45
0
20
40
60
80
Refinement angle
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0
22.5
45
0
100
200
300
Refinement angle
Noisy Bunny
0
22.5
45
0
0.5
1
1.5
·105
Refinement angle
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
57
==PAGE:66==
Refinement iterations
0
1
2
3
4
0
10
20
Refinement iters
Dihedral cost
Smooth Bunny
0
1
2
3
4
0
100
200
300
400
Refinement iters
Noisy Bunny
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
·104
Refinement iters
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
0
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
60
80
Refinement iters
Min angle cost
Smooth Bunny
0
1
2
3
4
0
100
200
300
Refinement iters
Noisy Bunny
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
·105
Refinement iters
High Genus
ours
rsr reference
The measures from the rotation system reconstruction paper do not present an excep-
tionally interesting picture. Firstly, the reconstructed vertex ratio and number of boundary
edges are completely independent of reexpansion parameters.
Many of the parameters have an insignificant or unintuitive effect on the quality. I would
like to first acknowledge that this is in part due to the large number of changes that I
deployed on the collapse and reexpansion algorithm within the last few weeks. Some of
these parameters had entirely different effects just a few weeks ago.
Number of iterations. Increasing the number of collapses first reduces reconstruction
quality, then keeps it flat, and then reduces it even further. The final quality here depends
heavily on how well the reconstruction algorithm can cope with the collapsed graph. With
the noisy bunny, so many points are redundant that even with 0.78% of the remaining
vertices, we do not see a significant drop in quality. While with High Genus 1, rotation
system reconstruction starts to fail when it comes to connecting the handles inside the
mesh when we go below 6.25% of the number of points in the input graph. Another thing
to note is that the collapse has a hole filling effect as the rotation system reconstruction
leaves fewer holes in the mesh. This also slowly plugged the five holes underneath the
bunnies at higher number of iterations.
Initial neighbors. Having a large number of initial neighbors is not particularly important
to the quality of our reconstruction algorithm, however it has a major impact on the perfor-
mance (see section 5.3.1). This makes sense since we want collapses to happen within
a vertex’s one ring, which will typically consist of 4-6 vertices.
Epsilon. At higher values, this parameter makes the collapse closer to shortest edge
first. These results came as a huge surprise to me as early experiments with QEMs
58
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:67==
outperformed purely edge length based collapses. Later on, I noticed that this correction
factor was needed because of the issue discussed in section 4.4.1. However, with an
initial neighbor number of 5, the issue is not very visible. Even still, higher values reduced
the quality of the smooth bunny very slightly where points are very smoothly spread out
with little variance in edge length meaning that there is still some benefit to QEMs under
specific scenarios.
Minimum Angle factor. Minimum angle factor negatively affects the dihedral cost and
has a more ambivalent effect on the minimum angle cost. This parameter was yet another
parameter that was added because it initially showed promise but it seems that once
again, a different combination of parameters seems to make it potentially redundant. Of
course, that would be entirely to our benefit since completely removing minimum angle
calculations from vertex splitting would greatly reduce our algorithm runtime.
Minimum angle threshold. This seems to have little effect globally, but it is worth noting
that the purpose of it is to prevent degenerate triangles to be created. If only a handful of
degenerate triangles are prevented as a result of this, it likely will not show on the plot. In
addition, the existence of both the minimum angle factor and the optimization phase may
reduce the need for this.
Refinement angle. The refinement angle has a major impact on the reconstruction quality
with the best dihedral angles achieved at around 22.5° and the best minimum angles
achieved at around 30°. Since this parameter is very coarse and allows unconditional
edge flips, this leads me to believe that there are cleverer schemes that are available that
will be more conditional about where to flip and improve quality even further.
Refinement iterations. As discussed in section 4.5, we absolutely need a refinement
step to achieve good quality. But after only a single step, we hit diminishing returns. Due
to how expensive the optimization step can be, we would prefer to do as few steps as
possible. Alternatively, we need a much cleverer optimization step that gets much closer
to the global minimum in terms of error than the current implementation.
5.3.1
Performance
Not every parameter has a particularly interesting impact on performance. The main ones
that affect performance are collapse iterations, collapse initial neighbors and refinement
iterations. All other performance results did not vary significantly and were excluded as a
result.
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
8
·104
maximum iterations
ns/vertex
4
6
8
10 12
0
2
4
6
8
·104
initial neighbors
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
·104
refinement iters
Smooth bunny
Noisy bunny
High genus 1
Figure 5.2: Performance impact of maximum iterations, number of initial neighbors, and
number of refinement iterations. Lower is better.
We hit diminishing returns in terms of performance gain after around 4 collapse iterations.
Although the actual performance gain could be much larger if parts of the algorithm are
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
59
==PAGE:68==
made more efficient. Increasing the initial neighbors for the collapse slows down the al-
gorithm for not really any gain in quality, so unless we find a newer heuristic that improves
quality but needs more neighbors, keeping the initial neighbor count at 4-6 makes sense.
Repeating the optimization phase also increases the runtime substantially for diminishing
returns, so the same story also applies there.
5.4
Discussion
Designing the assessment has been one of the most challenging aspects of this project.
Some aspects were simple. For example, while there are many ways of measuring run-
time speed, it ultimately comes down to running a stopwatch a number of times. Assess-
ing the quality of the reconstruction has proven much more challenging. In the case of a
bad reconstruction, it is easy to show a render of the mesh and call it out as bad, but it
is often much more difficult to identify what went wrong and what could have been done
better. Although the idea behind the reexpansion is that each step should clean after it-
self, it is possible for a reexpansion to create degenerate geometry, only for a subsequent
reexpansion to fix the problem (or make it worse). Observing the reexpansion and stop-
ping at poor reexpansions initially started out as an effective strategy to identify problems
within the algorithm only for the false negative rates to go up significantly after just a few
improvements. The result numbers might also simultaneously signal a good and a bad
result, but it would likely be better in the future to count unwanted outliers directly rather
than the somewhat unreliable global numbers.
5.4.1
Quality
At its current state, collapse and reconstruction has worse quality than the rotation sys-
tem reconstruction. This conclusion is a bit reductive however. Firstly, the mesh cost in
terms of dihedral angles ended up being fairly comparable to RSR. We are not perfect in
this regard since there are localized topological issues but I believe many of them can be
addressed with some smarter reconstruction. In terms of minimum angle cost, we con-
sistently underperformed RSR. Although RSR itself does not aim to minimize minimum
angles, it inserts edges from shortest to longest in a global fashion which is very likely to
result in a lot of equilateral triangles. In addition, very bad triangles are straight up not
added with RSR while we always try to insert edges. Having some bad triangles might
be preferable to having more gaps within the mesh. Finally, the minimum angle measure
becomes questionable in certain cases. For example, the smooth Stanford bunny looks
hardly different between the reconstructions yet the minimum angle measure indicates a
significant difference in quality.
The relationship between the collapse and reexpansion algorithm and rotation system re-
construction for boundary edges is quite interesting. Collapse and reexpansion cannot
add or remove boundary edges and a smaller point set helped RSR in generating fewer
gaps. This was especially notable for High Genus 1 which became watertight for 2-4 col-
lapse iterations. Being mindful of the input that we pass to RSR is likely key when it comes
to maximizing the efficacy of collapse and reexpansion and is likely how we will actually
improve upon RSR. On the other hand, having large gaps in the initial reconstruction was
catastrophic for reconstruction with large amounts of degenerate areas near the bound-
aries. I believe that a large part of this can simply be attributed to a lack of boundary
handling and that large improvements can be made by addressing this.
One concern is that this method might significantly underperform if the point cloud is large
but any reduction of it results in a substantial quality loss with RSR. This partially happens
with the High Genus 1 at larger collapse ratios and more challenging meshes will likely
cause even more trouble.
60
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:69==
On a more personal level, I also think about how rapidly the general quality of this algo-
rithm has changed in the past several weeks. Although the current mixture of operations
that put the quality remarkably close to the very robust and complicated rotation system
reconstruction seem very banal and almost trivial, actually finding that combination ended
up being a lengthy and arduous process that included a substantial amount of experimen-
tation, trial and error, and individual debugging. I am very impressed by how precise the
intuition of my advisor was when it came to what would work, but actually implementing
that in just the right way to get it to work was still a challenge with uncertainty.
There is likely very substantial room for improvement which is very promising given that
just two months ago, I was afraid that this was a potential null result. Although some
further changes are needed to replace the built in rotation system reconstruction with the
current algorithm, these results at the very least prove that this method is viable and is
most likely much easier to scale than plain RSR.
5.4.2
Performance
One limitation that I need to immediately acknowledge is the underwhelming gain in per-
formance compared to the original algorithm. One aspect of this is that the normal es-
timation (only included on the noisy Bunny results) is one of the only multithreaded part
that operates on the entire problem size when we are collapsing. Multithreading collapse
and reexpand is essential to maximizing the performance gain we can have, how this
can be done is discussed in section 4.6. Parallelization took a backseat to attempts at
improving the quality of the reconstruction, with the hope of matching the quality of the ro-
tation system reconstruction. I could argue that trying to achieve significant performance
improvements at this point without ensuring that our algorithm meets our quality stan-
dards would be premature. I believe this is congruent with the argument that I presented
in chapter 3 because I tried to make all of the design decisions with their performance
implications in mind. The current design of the collapse and reexpand algorithm leaves
significant room for performance improvements that can be realized if we actually wish to
chase after them.
For the collapse, not only do we globally initialize a graph but we also sort every edge.
Partitioning the graph would greatly speed up sorting. In addition, a full sort may not even
be particularly useful during the initial collapse. A straightforward alternative would be per-
forming a pass through our edges to check how expensive each edge is to collapse, and
then perform every decent collapse we can perform. Once we reach a more reasonable
input size, we can switch to a higher quality collapse method.
The next most important performance loss is related to the usage of quadric error metrics.
Although QEMs were important in bringing the quality of the reconstruction in the smooth
case nearly up to par with the rotation system reconstruction, they are not exactly the
measure we are looking for. The collapse phase has similarities to decimation but it is
not by itself a decimation operation. In a way, it would be beneficial for us if the rotation
system reconstruction has to make all of the ”difficult” decisions with regards to how to
reconstruct a mesh while we fill in the blanks with the rudimentary vertices that are non-
essential to describing the overall topology of the mesh. The main property of QEMs that
we want is that they tend to keep the overall graph sane since they avoid collapses that
would destabilize the topology. However, we probably do not need to fit a surface to every
point to achieve this purpose. Particularly, calculating the optimal point for collapsing an
edge is very expensive, while being very close to the midpoint in nearly all cases. QEMs
do not directly provide a way to interpolate the normals that we pass to the rotation system
reconstruction, which means we also need to do that. In addition, we also need to use the
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
61
==PAGE:70==
edge lengths in any case. It is fairly likely that a simpler measure can achieve comparable
quality without the computational overhead of QEMs. Whether tangent space distance
would achieve that however is hard to say.
Figure 5.3: Collapse and reexpand flamegraph.
The reexpansion is now the slowest part of the entire process. For starters, while I believe
it would be more challenging than the collapse, it can be parallelized as argued for in
section 4.6. However there are many other very easy performance wins. Firstly, we are
checking every permutation of edges in the one ring of a vertex for each reexpansion.
Although we tried a simple angular heuristic first, I ended up implementing this after that
consistently resulted in poor expansions. With that being said, since the ordering of the
edges for the edge split is significant, a lot of the candidates can almost immediately be
discarded since the expansion direction falls on the wrong side of the split edges. Right
now, on a vertex with a valency of 6, we check 30 permutations, however, if we just
consider situations where the edges are pointing at ”approximately the right direction”, we
can probably limit it to 3 candidates per edge. This would result in a significant reduction
in runtime due to how expensive it is to check each permutation. This makes it hard to say
what the net gain would be in practice as it might heavily depend on the mesh. Another
thing to note is that the split selection is pessimistic. For some collapses along mundane
topology, there are several good choices of reexpansions and greedily stopping when we
find one of them can improve performance.
62
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:71==
6
Gallery
Renders of the reconstruction can be found here. The left figure represents the mesh
after collapse and reconstruction but before the reexpansion. The right figure represents
the mesh after reexpansion. Each collapse iteration represents a one half reduction in
the number of vertices. So, after 1 iteration 50% of the vertices remain, after 2 iterations
25%, after 3 iterations 12.5% and so on.
The rest of this page is intentionally left blank.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
63
==PAGE:72==
Smooth Stanford Bunny
(a)
Rotation
system
recon-
struction.
(b) Collapsed 1 iteration.
(c) Reexpanded.
(d) Collapsed 2 iterations.
(e) Reexpanded.
(f) Collapsed 3 iterations.
(g) Reexpanded.
64
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:73==
(h) Collapsed 4 iterations.
(i) Reexpanded.
(j) Collapsed 5 iterations.
(k) Reexpanded.
(l) Collapsed 6 iterations.
(m) Reexpanded.
(n) Collapsed 7 iterations.
(o) Reexpanded.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
65
==PAGE:74==
Noisy Stanford Bunny
(a)
Rotation
system
recon-
struction.
(b) Collapsed 1 iteration.
(c) Reexpanded.
(d) Collapsed 2 iterations.
(e) Reexpanded.
(f) Collapsed 3 iterations.
(g) Reexpanded.
66
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:75==
(h) Collapsed 4 iterations.
(i) Reexpanded.
(j) Collapsed 5 iterations.
(k) Reexpanded.
(l) Collapsed 6 iterations.
(m) Reexpanded.
(n) Collapsed 7 iterations.
(o) Reexpanded.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
67
==PAGE:76==
High Genus 1
(a)
Rotation
system
recon-
struction.
(b) Collapsed 1 iteration.
(c) Reexpanded.
(d) Collapsed 2 iterations.
(e) Reexpanded.
(f) Collapsed 3 iterations.
(g) Reexpanded.
68
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:77==
(h) Collapsed 4 iterations.
(i) Reexpanded.
(j) Collapsed 5 iterations.
(k) Reexpanded.
(l) Collapsed 6 iterations.
(m) Reexpanded.
(n) Collapsed 7 iterations.
(o) Reexpanded.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:79==
7
Conclusion
Although research and technology always marches forward, each paper has to come to
an end. Writing this report was perhaps the most difficult part of this thesis, not because
of what I had to put in it, but because of what I could not. I wanted to provide as holistic
an overview into much of my work that did not necessarily stay within the bounds of what
the project plan set out. And there were so many changes based on later developments.
It is my hope that this was a pleasant read.
In terms of the rotation system reconstruction, we managed to attain a 3x performance
improvement from the original code despite not completing our initial goal of parallelizing
RSR. While I will snidely remark that there is likely even more room for performance im-
provements, a 3x performance improvement is still quite nice. This is something that is
always going to exist regardless of any of the edge cases that our collapse and reexpan-
sion algorithm cannot handle. The project ultimately focused very much on improving the
quality of collapse and reexpansion to experiment with some of the remaining identified
parallelization opportunities, but these can always be investigated at a later point.
The collapse and reexpansion went through a lot of changes throughout the project con-
current with my attitude and expectations. At the start, there was a great deal of hope and
optimism which slowly turned into concern combined with uncertainty. Everything took
a big positive turn in the last 2.5 months where our overall results improved massively.
Right now, it could be said to exist in a state of the minimum viable product. The quality
and performance are a bit underwhelming but with many relatively easy opportunities for
improvement that the RSR lacks. The most obvious one is to replace QEM completely
possibly with tangent space distances and/or another simple measure. Since QEMs went
from important to nearly redundant through the span of the project, this would be one of the
easiest areas of improvement that we can explore. On the reexpansion end, the design
space is quite a bit larger for experimentation. The most obvious improvements would be
to eliminate potentially redundant quality measures from within edge splitting and filter-
ing obviously bad splits early. These would provide a major performance improvement
that would already bring collapse and reexpansion from academic to being desirable. In
terms of quality, one potential improvement would be to discriminate between splits that
are mundane, sharp, and degenerate. The optimization phase almost certainly also has
a very large room for improvement since the heuristic of flipping all edges if they have a
corner with an angle below 22.5° was nice due to its simplicity but is almost certainly not
optimal. It is likely that a fast local optimization algorithm can be written that will perform
fewer overall flips but will make all of those flips count that will provide us with reasonable
good geometry given a good set of collapses. It will take this work to make this reex-
pansion the current state of the art, but the dissertation must end at some point and I am
happy with its current state.
Answering the question of whether more people will use mesh reconstruction in GEL
with the performance improvements will require integrating the changes presented in this
project with the GEL main branch and releasing a new version of pygel. This will likely be
our current short term goal.
Perhaps the most interesting thing about this entire project was that it made me under-
stand how people can work on a single problem for years. For most of my academic life,
I did not get to work on a single problem for such a long period. Even for my bachelor
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
71
==PAGE:80==
projects, they were concurrent with other classes and we were not working on novel prob-
lems. My involvement more or less ended the moment I did my submission. This time, I
worked on one problem for six months and made several contributions to what was state
of the art in 2024. And it still feels like much more could be done, and not in any superficial
sense. It is a new feeling. And a very pleasant one.
72
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Ruiqi Cui et al. “Surface Reconstruction Using Rotation Systems”. In: ACM Trans.
Graph. 43.6 (Nov. 2024). ISSN: 0730-0301. DOI: 10.1145/3687956. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3687956.
[2]
Andreas Bærentzen et al. GEL: A library of geometry processing tools for computer
graphics. 2014. URL: https://github.com/janba/GEL.
[3]
Matthew Berger et al. “A Survey of Surface Reconstruction from Point Clouds”. In:
Computer Graphics Forum 36 (Mar. 2016). DOI: 10.1111/cgf.12802.
[4]
Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Blender
Foundation. Stichting Blender Foundation, Amsterdam, 2018. URL: http://www.
blender.org.
[5]
E. Catmull and J. Clark. “Recursively generated B-spline surfaces on arbitrary topo-
logical meshes”. In: Computer-Aided Design 10.6 (1978), pp. 350–355. ISSN: 0010-
4485. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4485(78)90110-0. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0010448578901100.
[6]
Michael Garland and Paul S. Heckbert. “Surface simplification using quadric error
metrics”. In: Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’97. USA: ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing Co., 1997, pp. 209–216. ISBN: 0897918967. DOI: 10.1145/258734.258849.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/258734.258849.
[7]
David Eppstein. Twenty-one Proofs of Euler’s Formula. URL: https://ics.uci.edu/
~eppstein/junkyard/euler/.
[8]
Andreas Bærentzen. PyGEL 3D (Python Bindings for GEL) contains tools for polyg-
onal mesh based geometry processing. 2019. URL: https : / / pypi . org / project /
PyGEL3D/.
[9]
Donald E. Knuth. “Structured Programming with go to Statements”. In: ACM Com-
put. Surv. 6.4 (Dec. 1974), pp. 261–301. ISSN: 0360-0300. DOI: 10.1145/356635.
356640. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/356635.356640.
[10]
W. M. McKeeman. “Peephole optimization”. In: Commun. ACM 8.7 (July 1965),
pp. 443–444. ISSN: 0001-0782. DOI: 10.1145/364995.365000. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1145/364995.365000.
[11]
Mark N. Wegman and F. Kenneth Zadeck. “Constant propagation with conditional
branches”. In: ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 13.2 (Apr. 1991), pp. 181–210.
ISSN: 0164-0925. DOI: 10.1145/103135.103136. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
103135.103136.
[12]
Aria Desires. Compiler Optimizations Are Hard Because They Forget. Sept. 2022.
URL: https://faultlore.com/blah/oops-that-was-important/.
[13]
Brandon Gregg. Flame Graphs. 2013. URL: https : / / www . brendangregg . com /
flamegraphs.html.
[14]
Yong Luo and K.W. Cameron. “Instruction-level characterization of scientific com-
puting applications using hardware performance counters”. In: Workload Character-
ization: Methodology and Case Studies. Based on the First Workshop on Workload
Characterization. 1998, pp. 125–131. DOI: 10.1109/WWC.1998.809368.
[15]
Raymond Chen. The Old New Thing: Optimization is often counterintuitive. Dec.
2004. URL: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20041216-00/?p=36973.
[16]
Martin Leitner-Ankerl. ankerl::nanobench, a platform independent microbenchmark-
ing library for C++11/14/17/20. 2019. URL: https://nanobench.ankerl.com/.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
73
==PAGE:82==
[17]
Chris Lattner. What Every C Programmer Should Know About Undefined Behavior.
May 2011. URL: https://blog.llvm.org/2011/05/what-every-c-programmer-should-
know.html.
[18]
Raymond Chen. The Old New Thing: Undefined behavior can result in time travel.
June 2014. URL: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20140627-00/?p=633.
[19]
Emil Ernerfeldt. The Myth of RAM. Apr. 2014. URL: https://www.ilikebigbits.com/
2014_04_21_myth_of_ram_1.html.
[20]
Tomasz Jurkiewicz and Kurt Mehlhorn. “The cost of address translation”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Meeting on Algorithm Engineering & Expermiments. New Orleans,
Louisiana: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2013, pp. 148–162.
[21]
Viktor Kirilov. doctest: The fastest feature-rich C++11/14/17/20/23 single-header
testing framework. 2015. URL: https://github.com/doctest/doctest.
[22]
John Backus. “Can programming be liberated from the von Neumann style? a func-
tional style and its algebra of programs”. In: Commun. ACM 21.8 (Aug. 1978),
pp. 613–641. ISSN: 0001-0782. DOI: 10.1145/359576.359579. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1145/359576.359579.
[23]
cppreference: Ranges Library. 2020. URL: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/
ranges.html.
[24]
cppreference: std::owning_view. 2020. URL: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/
ranges/owning_view.html.
[25]
Linus Nyman and Mikael Laakso. “Notes on the History of Fork and Join”. In: IEEE
Annals of the History of Computing 38.3 (2016), pp. 84–87. DOI: 10.1109/MAHC.
2016.34.
[26]
cppreference: Execution policy types. 2020. URL: https://en.cppreference.com/w/
cpp/algorithm/execution_policy_tag_t.html.
[27]
cppreference: Compiler support for C++17. 2025. URL: https://en.cppreference.
com/w/cpp/compiler_support/17.html.
[28]
Overview of Malloc. glibc Wiki. URL: https://sourceware.org/glibc/wiki/MallocInternals.
[29]
Michael Kerrisk, ed. mmap, munmap - map or unmap files or devices into memory.
the Linux man-pages project. URL: https://man7.org/linux/man- pages/man2/
mmap.2.html.
[30]
Jason Evans. “A Scalable Concurrent malloc(3) Implementation for FreeBSD”. In:
BDScan. Apr. 2006. URL: https://people.freebsd.org/~jasone/jemalloc/bsdcan2006/
jemalloc.pdf.
[31]
Ralph Katz and Thomas J. Allen. “Investigating the Not Invented Here (NIH) syn-
drome: A look at the performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R &
D Project Groups”. In: R&D Management 12.1 (1982), pp. 7–20. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9310.1982.tb00478.x.
[32]
Chandler Carruth. Efficiency with Algorithms, Performance with Data Structures.
2014. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fHNmRkzxHWs.
[33]
Sam Benzaquen et al. Swiss Tables and absl::Hash. 2018. URL: https://abseil.io/
blog/20180927-swisstables.
[34]
Gregory Popovitch. The Parallel Hashmap or Abseiling from the shoulders of giants.
Mar. 2019. URL: https://greg7mdp.github.io/parallel-hashmap/.
[35]
cppreference: Copy elision. 2020. URL: https : / / en . cppreference . com / w / cpp /
language/copy_elision.html.
[36]
H.J. Lu et al. System V Application Binary Interface AMD64 Architecture Processor
Supplement (With LP64 and ILP32 Programming Models). Version 1.0. Mar. 2025.
[37]
Sean Baxter. Why Safety Profiles Failed. Oct. 2024. URL: https : / / www . circle -
lang.org/draft-profiles.html.
74
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
==PAGE:83==
[38]
Jingwei Huang, Hao Su, and Leonidas Guibas. Robust Watertight Manifold Surface
Generation Method for ShapeNet Models. 2018. arXiv: 1802.01698 [cs.CG]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01698.
[39]
Jakob Andreas Bærentzen et al. Guide to Computational Geometry Processing:
Foundations, Algorithms, and Methods. English. Springer, 2012. ISBN: 978-1-4471-
4074-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4075-7.
[40]
Tong Zhao et al. “Variational Shape Reconstruction via Quadric Error Metrics”. In:
ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings. SIGGRAPH ’23. Los Angeles,
CA, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. ISBN: 9798400701597. DOI:
10.1145/3588432.3591529. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3588432.3591529.
[41]
The Stanford 3D Scanning Repository. 2023. URL: https://graphics.stanford.edu/
data/3Dscanrep/.
[42]
Greg Turk and Marc Levoy. “Zippered polygon meshes from range images”. In:
Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’94. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 1994, pp. 311–318. ISBN: 0897916670. DOI: 10.1145/192161.192241. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/192161.192241.
Efficient Combinatorial Reconstruction of Triangle Meshes from Point Clouds
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
