==PAGE:1==
Classification
and
assessment
of
laser-
induced damage of mammalian cells
Klassificering og evaluering af laser-induceret
beskadigelse af mammale celler
Connor Patrick Povlsen Gore
Georgia Argyriadou
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
Klassificering og evaluering af laser-induceret beskadigelse af mammale celler
Master Thesis
November, 2025
By
Connor Patrick Povlsen Gore
Georgia Argyriadou
Supervisors:
Dr. Peter E. Andersen
Dr. Gavrielle Untracht
PhD Stud. Freja Høier
Published by
DTU Health Tech, Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:4==
ii
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1
Introduction
9
2
Multiphoton Microscopy
11
2.1
Principles of Multiphoton Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Two-Photon Microscopy and the Optical Window of Biological Tissues . . .
11
2.3
Fundamental Principles of Two-Photon Excitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Ultrafast laser parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Light-Induced Cell Damage
17
3.1
Mammalian cell physiology and dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Laser-induced cell damage mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Literature Review on Cell Damage
23
4.1
Overview of studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
International regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
End of review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Materials and Methods
29
5.1
Cell Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Irradiation and Characterisation Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Image Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Statistical Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Cell Viability Results
43
6.1
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at 800 nm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at 1040 nm . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
Impact of Pixel Dwell Time and Number of Scans on Cell Viability at 800 nm 51
6.4
Experiment of three different constant fluence wells at different average
irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7
Discussion
61
7.1
Experimental variability and sample size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.2
Influence of cell confluence on cell imaging and counting
. . . . . . . . . . 61
7.3
Influence on viability ratio from watershed segmentation and other protocol
limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.4
Wavelength dependence of cell viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.5
Influence on cell viability from fluence, irradiance, and dwell time . . . . . . 63
7.6
Thermal relaxation and bubble formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7.7
Scanning parameters and flyback considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.8
Optical misalignment and imaging artifacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7.9
Comparison of this work to literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
8
Conclusion
71
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
iii
==PAGE:6==
9
Future Perspectives
73
Bibliography
75
A ROS-caused Damage Mechanisms
81
B Literature Review Table
83
C Power measurements
85
D FOV of NIR and PMTs images measurements
86
E
Live/Dead Fluorescence Images - Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at
800 nm - First Experiment
88
F
Live/Dead Fluorescence Images - Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at
800 nm - Second Experiment
90
G Live/Dead Fluorescence Images - Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at
1040 nm
92
H Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiments on Impact of Fluence
on Cell Viability at 800 nm
94
I
Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiments on Impact of Fluence
on Cell Viability at 1040 nm
97
J
Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiment on Impact of Scan
Rate and Number of Scans on Cell Viability at 800 nm
99
K Live/Dead counts and viability data for 800 nm irradiation at 4.54 × 107 J/m2102
L
Excitation and emission spectra of CAM and EthD-1 with emission filters
103
M Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for experiment on
the Impact of Fluence on Cell Viability at 800 nm
104
N Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for experiment on
the Impact of Fluence on Cell Viability at 1040 nm
105
O Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for experiment on
the Impact of Scan Rate and Number of Scans on Cell Viability at 800 nm
106
P
Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for experiment on
the Impact of Irradiance on Cell Viability at 800 nm at 4.54 × 107 J/m2
108
Q MATLAB Code for Image Pre-processing
109
R Fiji Macro for Cell Counting, Segmentation, and CSV Export
112
S
Fiji Macro for Merging Red and Green Channels into Composite Images and
set scale bars and cropping when is needed
114
T
Fiji Macro for Scale Bars at the NIR Images
116
iv
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Multiphoton microscopy (MPM) has emerged as a biomedical imaging tool that enables
high-resolution near-infrared imaging while providing high specificity, deep penetration,
and low phototoxicity. However, the widespread use of MPM, especially in in vivo appli-
cations, is limited by the potential for laser-induced cell damage when laser parameters
exceed specific thresholds. Variation in exposure thresholds across different setups, cell
types, and laser parameters currently limits standardisation. The motivation for this work
is therefore to contribute to the field of laser-induced cell damage by proposing a protocol
for investigating mammalian cells and the laser-parameter dependencies on cell viability.
The HT-29 colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line was chosen for the investigation.
The HT-29 cells were irradiated with an 80 MHz, 100 fs pulsed laser at 800 nm while
varying fluence, irradiance, dwell time, and scan repetition. The wavelength dependence
of cell viability was investigated by irradiating HT-29 cells at 1040 nm with the same sys-
tem. Cell viability was quantified using LIVE/DEAD™fluorescence assays, in which the
cells were imaged with MPM. To process the results, automated image pre-processing
and segmentation were performed using MATLAB and FIJI (ImageJ), respectively.
The investigation into fluence at 800 nm showed a median cell viability of 87.9% at a flu-
ence of 4.54 × 107J/m2 (irradiance: 1.42 × 1011 W/m2), a steep decrease from the con-
trol median of 99.5%. The lowest cell viability recorded for a sample exposed at 800 nm
was 33%, corresponding to a fluence of 7.57 × 107J/m2. In contrast, HT-29 cells exposed
to similar conditions–irradiance of 1.42 × 1011 W/m2 and fluence of 4.48 × 107J/m2–at
1040 nm showcased a median cell viability of 98.6%, versus 87.9% at 800 nm. Further-
more, median cell viability was maintained high at 97.2% when increasing the irradiance
to 1.89 × 1011W/m2 and the fluence to 6.04 × 107J/m2 at 1040 nm.
This research demonstrated that cell viability depends on fluence, irradiance, and wave-
length following exposure to an ultrafast pulsed laser. Additionally, the protocol devel-
oped in this study shows potential as a standardised approach to quantifying cell viability
in laser-induced cell damage studies, with good reproducibility and minimal cell stress,
as evidenced by the high control viability values. As research on laser-induced cell dam-
age becomes more established, it will yield more definitive cell damage thresholds based
on key laser parameters. Essentially, implementing a gold standard will lead to system-
atically safer MPM imaging in biomedical applications, advancing health technology for
people.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:9==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over eight months at the Biophotonic Imaging Group, De-
partment of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfil-
ment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng).
Image-processing algorithms were developed with the assistance of artificial intelligence
through M365 Copilot (13/11/2025 GPT-5) and thoroughly tested. Grammarly was used
for spell-checking, which discloses the use of artificial intelligence for some of its functions.
Connor Patrick Povlsen Gore - s184439
Signature
Date
Georgia Argyriadou - s225571
Signature
Date
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
ATCC
. .
American Type Culture Collection
CHO . . .
Chinese hamster ovary
DMEM . .
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium
DPBS
. .
Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline
FBS
. . .
Fetal bovine serum
FOV . . .
Field of view
ICNIRP
.
International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection
IEC . . . .
International Electrotechnical Commission
ISO . . . .
International Organisation for Standardization
MPM . . .
Multiphoton microscopy/microscope
NIR . . . .
Near-infrared
PBS . . .
Phosphate-buffered saline
PCD . . .
Programmed cell death
PMT . . .
Photomultiplier tube
ROI . . . .
Region of Interest
ROS . . .
Reactive oxygen species
TIMAHC .
Two-photon Imaging that is Modular, Adaptable, High-performance and
Cost-effective
UCD . . .
Unprogrammed cell death
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
5
==PAGE:12==
6
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:13==
Acknowledgements
Peter E. Andersen, Professor and Supervisor, DTU Health Tech
Our supervisor, who provided expert guidance and insight into this project. The knowledge
base provided by Andersen was pivotal for the smoothness and success of the project,
and a lot of good discussion came as a result of his presence. He was always up for
discussing theory and prioritised us.
Gavrielle Untracht, Assistant Professor and Supervisor, DTU Health Tech
Our supervisor, who was crucial for the structure and completion of this project. Her quick
responsiveness after equipment failure was a pivotal moment in this project. Her knowl-
edge and assistance was important to complete this journey. She was always avaliable
for discussion and gave great advice in how to solve certain problems.
Freja Høier, PhD student and Supervisor, DTU Health Tech
Our supervisor, who was always available and crucial to the technical preparations for
this project. She trained us on all the required training for the GMO-1 lab and the MPM
system. She was always communicating with us whenever we had a doubt or question,
and she also came up with ideas and solutions to our problems.
Niels Bent Larsen, Professor, DTU Health Tech
Provided training and crucial knowledge for the MPM system and the biological field. This
was critical to the project’s execution and we were happy to share our knowledge on the
system with him.
Helene Ringvig, Laborant, 423 cell lab responsible
Provided training for cell culturing in the GMO-1 lab at building 423. This was significant
for the project’s execution, and every question we had received a great response to.
Biophotonic Imaging Group
We want to thank the BIG Group for their support and energy. It was a privilege during this
project to be among this group of people who had so much to share. The valuable insights
and feedback they provided throughout this work were pivotal in shaping the direction of
this project.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
7
==PAGE:14==
8
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the medical study and optimisation of
biomedical practices. This has led to the development of advanced imaging, diagnostic,
and therapeutic methods that enable non-invasive imaging of living tissues with subcellu-
lar precision. Among these techniques, multiphoton microscopy (MPM) has emerged as a
key imaging method. Increasing research attention has been directed toward MPM, aim-
ing to establish its role in medical diagnostics and treatment applications, as it combines
high spatial resolution with minimal photodamage and deep tissue penetration.
The main advantage of MPM lies in its use of non-linear photon absorption processes,
which confine fluorescence excitation to a small focal volume and thereby reduce out-of-
focus phototoxicity. However, despite the optical precision offered by controlled imaging,
the widespread use of MPM is limited by the potential for cellular damage when laser
parameters exceed specific thresholds. Understanding, defining, and quantifying these
limits through systematic examination is primarily significant. Ultimately contributing to
the development of safer and more effective biomedical imaging techniques.
At the cellular level, laser-induced damage occurs through a combination of physical and
biochemical mechanisms, including photothermal, photochemical, and photomechanical
effects, all of which can modify cellular structures and functions. The type, extent, and un-
derlying process of damage are directly influenced by specific laser parameters such as
wavelength, fluence, irradiance, and pulse duration. In MPM, multiphoton excitation typi-
cally uses near-infrared (NIR) light to minimise absorption and scattering within biological
tissues. However, at high intensities, non-linear effects can arise, increasing the likeli-
hood of irreversible photodamage. Therefore, evaluating these effects is fundamental to
establishing well-defined safety thresholds for biological imaging.
Previous studies have investigated laser-induced damage across various mammalian cell
lines and biological samples under different irradiation conditions, leading to threshold lev-
els with distinct forms of cellular damage. However, the reported thresholds often show
significant variation, mainly due to differences in experimental configurations, laser char-
acteristics, and biological conditions. Moreover, a limited number of studies have provided
evaluations to relate the laser parameters to effects such as cell viability and proliferation.
This lack of standardisation, combined with the complexity of interacting variables, makes
comparisons between experiments difficult and often inconclusive. Therefore, there is a
clear need to standardise methodologies for laser use in living systems, thereby improving
reproducibility and ensuring biosafe imaging and conditions for therapeutic applications.
The present study aims to assess laser-induced damage in mammalian cells using MPM
as both an imaging and irradiation process. There is an attempt to further understanding of
safe laser use by providing a simplified and coherent visualisation of cell damage thresh-
olds. Specifically, this work investigates the relationship between key laser parameters—
such as wavelength, fluence, irradiance, and dwell time—and their combined effects on
cell viability in cultured HT-29 cells.
In particular, the study explores whether not only irradiance but also fluence has a cru-
cial role in defining the threshold at which damage occurs. By quantifying these thresh-
olds and estimating cellular responses through fluorescence viability assay and statistical
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
9
==PAGE:16==
analysis, this thesis aims to establish a clearer framework for understanding laser–cell in-
teractions under multiphoton excitation. Furthermore, since HT-29 cells are derived from
human colon epithelium, the findings may have implications for endoscopic imaging and
therapeutic applications, where multiphoton or other laser-based systems could enable
precise, minimally invasive diagnostics with reduced risk of tissue damage. The findings
are intended to enhance experimental reproducibility and guide the optimisation of imag-
ing parameters for the safe and effective use of multiphoton microscopy in biomedical
applications [1, 2].
10
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:17==
2
Multiphoton Microscopy
This chapter describes the theoretical background underlying multi-photon microscopy
(MPM), emphasising its physical principles and optical mechanisms, which are relevant
to the present study.
2.1
Principles of Multiphoton Microscopy
Multiphoton Microscopy (MPM) has evolved in recent years and is now regarded as one of
the most powerful techniques for studying living biological samples. Its primary advantage
lies in its ability to reach high-resolution, three-dimensional imaging while significantly
reducing phototoxicity and photobleaching effects within the specimen [3]. Through the
mechanism of simultaneous absorption of two or more photons, fluorescence excitation is
spatially confined at the focal volume, where fluorescence refers to the emission of light
by a molecule after excitation, allowing not only deep tissue imaging but also precise,
localized activation of photonic processes within living tissues [3, 4].
This leads to the extensive use of various applications of near-infrared (700–1100 nm),
which penetrates deeper into tissues and causes reduced cell damage. These charac-
teristics make MPM suitable for investigating the threshold of cell destruction, which is
implied as the intensity limit beyond which focused radiation induces irreversible biophys-
ical damage [3, 5–7].
2.2
Two-Photon Microscopy and the Optical Window of
Biological Tissues
In two-photon microscopy, the NIR spectrum is often chosen, which has a clear con-
nection with the so-called optical window of cells and tissues, as shown in Figure 2.1.
In the wavelength range of approximately 600–1300 nm, absorption by endogenous ab-
sorbers such as hemoglobin and melanin, as well as absorption by water (∼0.1 cm−1),
is minimised, making tissues almost transparent [7]. For the above reasons, deeper light
penetration and limitation of phototoxicity are observed in this region.
In the current study, the fundamental principles of two-photon microscopy are referred to
most, since a two-photon microscope was used both for imaging and for controlled irradi-
ation of cells in two-dimensional cultures (as it will be described in Materials and Methods
5. This enables the quantitative determination of the damage threshold and the observa-
tion of photosensitivity as a function of experimental parameters such as pulse energy,
duration, and wavelength. The use of the same optical system for both irradiation and
imaging allows enhancement of the correlation between the observed cellular response
and the physical characteristics of the excitation beam.
The working principle of MPM can be illustrated from the Jablonski diagram, through en-
ergy levels (Figure 2.2a). In two-photon absorption, a fluorophore is excited to a high-
energy state by two lower-energy photons and then relaxes to the ground state. Subse-
quently, after excitation, there is a possibility of non-radiative relaxation occurring, lead-
ing to fluorescence emission. The Jablonski diagram (Figure 2.2a) helps in understand-
ing fluorescence emission, non-radiative relaxation, and potential photochemical damage
mechanisms [5, 6].
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: Optical window of biological tissues showing relative absorbance of water, lipids, and
melanin across the NIR spectral range[8].
2.3
Fundamental Principles of Two-Photon Excitation
The equation describes the efficiency of two-photon excitation and the following fluores-
cence yield [6]:
n = P 2α
(τf2)
p2NA4
(hcλ)2
(2.1)
where:
• n: number of absorbed photon pairs,
• P: average laser power,
• α: molecular double absorption coefficient,
• τ: pulse duration,
• f: repetition rate,
• p: probability of fluorescence,
• NA: numerical diameter of the lens,
• λ: wavelength,
• h: Planck constant,
• c: speed of light.
This relationship indicates that the efficiency increases with high peak power and short
pulse duration. Moreover, especially for very short pulses (typically less than 50 fs), some
special compression and dispersion correction techniques are additionally needed, so that
the in situ pulse duration remains within around 150–250 fs, which is a suitable range for
safe imaging of living cells without significant thermal or photochemical damage.
12
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:19==
Irradiation
480nm
380nm
One-Photon Excitation
Two-Photon Excitation
hvabs
Internal conversion 
(relaxation time)
Internal conversion 
(relaxation time)
Ground State
hvem
Emission
Absorption
480nm
hvem
Fluorescence
Emission
760nm
hvabs
hvabs
Absorption
Irradiation
Fluorescence
(a) Simplified Jablonski diagram illustrating the principle of two-
photon excitation and fluorescence emission.
One-Photon Excitation
Two-Photon Excitation
Focal Plane
𝐼! ∝𝐼"#$%&
𝐼! ∝ 𝐼"#$%&
'
(b) Optical window of biological tis-
sues showing relative absorbance of
water, lipids, and melanin across the
NIR spectral range.
Figure 2.2: (a) Jablonski diagram and (b) excitation beam size illustration.
The use of NIR wavelengths also reduces scattering, as Rayleigh scattering intensity is
inversely proportional to the fourth power of the wavelength (I ∝1/λ4), allowing deeper
tissue imaging compared to shorter wavelengths [7].
2.4
Ultrafast laser parameters
2.4.1
Laser Scanning Mechanisms and Imaging
In the previous section, the fundamental fluorescence physics was defined during the ex-
citation process. Although the scanning and detection systems determine the spatial and
temporal resolution. In practical MPM setups, the excitation beam is scanned across the
sample using galvanometric mirrors or resonant scanners. The same scanning system
can be used for controlled irradiation, enabling precise studies of cellular photodamage
and photosensitivity under defined experimental parameters[3]. The combination of ultra-
fast pulsed lasers and scanning optics makes MPM highly flexible, allowing simultaneous
high-resolution imaging and targeted photostimulation.
Advantages
Localized Excitation: Due to the concentrated excitation around the focal region (Figure
2.2b), fluorescence production, and therefore photobleaching and phototoxicity beyond
this level are minimised. This is particularly important in live cell and in vivo imaging,
where maintaining viability is critical.
Deep Tissue Penetration/Imaging: Furthermore, scattering is reduced compared to
single-photon microscopy, as longer wavelengths of lower energy are used for the two-
photon excitation. NIR wavelengths scatter less than visible light, enabling imaging of
thick or highly scattering tissues such as brain slices or live animals.
No Pinhole Required: A significant advantage of this technique is the absence of a pin-
hole, as no out-of-focus fluorescence is produced. The above provides greater flexibility
in the microscope detection geometry, as collecting scattered emission photons without
routing them through the optical scans and pinhole allows for optimisation of signal col-
lection deep within a sample.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
13
==PAGE:20==
Limitations
Reduced Resolution: Although the sectioning capability is comparable to an ideal confo-
cal system in two-photon excitation, the system lacks resolution. Longer excitation wave-
lengths increase diffraction-limited spot size, slightly lowering spatial resolution compared
to confocal microscopy.
High Cost and Complexity: For the proper operation of the two-photon microscope, high
instantaneous photon densities are required, increasing the cost, the quality of the optics
used, and the complexity.
Depth Limitations: Imaging depth is constrained by tissue labeling, light scattering, and
objective working distance.
Table 2.1: Comparison between confocal and multiphoton microscopy[5].
Parameter
Confocal Microscopy
Multiphoton Microscopy
Excitation
Ultraviolet
or
visible
laser
(lower cost)
Pulsed infrared laser (higher
cost)
Imaging depth
Typically < 20 µm
Up to 500–600 µm
Spatial resolution
Theoretically up to: 0.14 µm
laterally, 0.57 µm axially∗
Theoretically up to: 0.23 µm
laterally, 0.93 µm axially∗
Sensitivity to scattering High
Low
Photobleaching
and
phototoxicity
High
Low
Fluorescence localiza-
tion
Throughout sample
Confined to focal plane
∗Approximately 488 nm excitation for confocal and 900 nm excitation for multiphoton.
2.4.2
Key Parameters of Ultrafast Pulsed-Lasers [9], [10]
Ultrafast pulsed lasers used in MPM are characterised by several key parameters such
as pulse energy, average power, peak power, pulse duration, and repetition rate. An
illustration of pulsed laser parameters is demonstrated in Figure 2.3.
• The period (∆t) is expressed in seconds (s) and represents the amount of time from
the start of one pulse to the next. Each period contains a single pulse, and all energy
emitted during one full period is delivered by the pulse.
• The pulse duration or pulse width (τ), expressed in seconds (s), determines the
temporal width of a pulse. It is typically measured by the full width at half maximum
(FWHM) of a pulse shape.
• The repetition rate (frep), expressed in Hertz (Hz = s−1), is equivalent to the fre-
quency with which pulses are emitted.
• Pulse energy is defined as the area under one full period of the power measurement
curve and is expressed in Joules (J):
E = Pavg
frep
(J)
(2.2a)
or equivalently,
E = Pavg ∆t
(W · s = J).
(2.2b)
14
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:21==
Period Δt (s)
Pulse Energy
Ppeak
Pavg
0
τ
Time (s)
Optical Power
Figure 2.3: Pulsed laser key parameters
• Average power Pavg (in Watts, W = J/s) is the height on the power axis, if the energy
emitted by the pulse were uniformly spread over the entire period:
Pavg = E
∆t
(W).
(2.3)
• Peak power Ppeak (in Watts, W) is the peak optical power during the pulse:
Ppeak = E
τ
(W).
(2.4a)
It may also be written as:
Ppeak = Pavg
frep τ = Pavg
∆t
τ
(W),
(2.4b)
or
Ppeak =
Pavg
DutyCycle
(W).
(2.4c)
• ,where Duty cycle (dimensionless) is defined as the fraction of time the laser is
emitting:
DutyCycle = τ
∆t.
(2.5)
Summary of Units
Pulse width and period control the average power emitted by the laser. Both pulse energy
and average energy depend on pulse width. Increase (or reduce) pulse width to increase
(or reduce) both pulse energy and average power. Pulse energy does not depend on
period, but average energy does. Reducing the period increases the average power.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
15
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.2: Summary of Pulsed Laser Parameters and Units
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Period
∆t
s
Pulse width
τ
s
Repetition rate
frep
Hz (s−1)
Pulse energy
E
J
Average power
Pavg
W
Peak power
Ppeak
W
Duty cycle
–
dimensionless
2.4.3
Exposed related parameters
Two significant terms used to describe the optical exposure of a sample in multi-photon
microscopy are average irradiance and fluence.
Irradiance is defined as the radiant flux received by a surface per unit area[11]. It can be
estimated as the ratio of the average power divided by the beam area, expressed in watts
per square metre (W/m2):
I = Pavg
A
(W m−2)
(2.6)
where Pavg is calculated from Eq. 2.3 and A is the beam area in square meters.
Additionally, fluence is demonstrated as the time-integrated flux of the radiation. In multi-
photon microscopy, this refers to the optical energy delivered per unit area[12], which is
the product of the irradiance and the exposure time. Units are joules per square metre
(J/m2):
F = I · t = E
A
(J m−2)
(2.7)
where E is calculated from Eq. 2.2a or 2.2b and A is the beam area in square meters.
Fluence is widely used to analyse non-linear processes, as well as laser-induced damage
thresholds. Because peak power and pulse energy are inversely related to pulse width,
both irradiance and fluence are strongly affected by pulse duration and repetition rate.
These parameters are therefore crucial for evaluating the cell viability thresholds in MPM.
Ultimately, multiphoton microscopy provides high-resolution imaging with low phototoxi-
city. This makes it optimal for live cell and in vivo studies. Despite limitations such as
reduced resolution and system complexity, MPM is denoted as an adaptable and reliable
tool in biological imaging.
16
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:23==
3
Light-Induced Cell Damage
This chapter introduces the physiology and dynamics of mammalian cells, highlighting
the primary mechanisms of cell damage and the types of cell death. Furthermore, the
main mechanisms of laser-induced cell damage are described in detail, connecting the
perturbation inflicted by laser irradiation to the cell physiology.
3.1
Mammalian cell physiology and dynamics
Figure 3.1: Simple schematic of the mammalian cell, showcasing the organelles supported by the
cytoplasm and surrounded by a plasma membrane. Figure taken from Browne et al. 2024 [13].
Mammalian cells are biological structures containing various organelles suspended in a
gel-like substance called the cytoplasm, and enclosed by a plasma membrane (see Figure
3.1). These cells serve as structural units of mammals, including humans. The human
body consists of approximately 37 trillion cells, with the cells connecting to form different
types of tissues, making cells the fundamental basis of all processes in the human body
[14–16]. Understanding mammalian cell behaviour is therefore crucial for the research of
human health, as cellular function and regulation directly affect the human body.
Mammalian cells continuously regulate their internal processes to maintain homeostasis–
a self-regulatory mechanism that maintains stability in response to internal or external
stimuli. Suppose the stimulus is excessive or the cell is unable to maintain homeostasis.
In that case, this can result in either non-lethal damage that can be corrected through
repair mechanisms or irreversible, lethal damage that leads to cell death [17–20]. Figure
3.2 illustrates the main mechanisms of cell damage, including mitochondrial damage,
membrane damage, DNA and protein damage, increased production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), ATP depletion, and entry of calcium ions [21]. Additionally, the figure
highlights the interconnected nature of these mechanisms, where mitochondrial damage
may lead to an increase in ROS production, or an excessive amount of calcium ions may
perturb mitochondria, demonstrating that cell damage in one area can trigger a cascade
of additional damage mechanisms.
Cell death marks the final stage in the life of a cell and the death occurs mainly in two
different pathways: programmed and unprogrammed. Programmed cell death (PCD) is
a physiologically regulated process initiated by the cell in response to stimuli, causing the
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: Main cellular damage mechanisms. Figure taken from Napotnik et al. 2019 [21].
cell to cease functioning and program itself to die. Furthermore, the most discussed mode
is apoptosis, an anti-inflammatory cell death process characterised by the ability to create
apoptotic bodies while maintaining membrane integrity that neighbouring cells ingest via
phagocytes, thereby protecting other cells from damaging cellular contents [22].
The other death a cell can experience is unprogrammed cell death (UCD), which is an
uncontrolled acute process, resulting in cell membrane rupture and the leakage of inflam-
matory cellular contents, also known as necrosis [23, 24].
Figure 3.3 showcases different types of cell death and their morphology during the pro-
cess, in which apoptosis and necrosis are the classic modes of programmed and unpro-
grammed cell death, respectively. Therefore, if the cell has died acutely as a result of
the perturbation i.e. laser irradiation, the result is necrosis of the cell, while if the cell is
programmed to die due to excessive damage and unable to repair itself, the result is clas-
sified as apoptosis (or another PCD mode) of the cell. The following sections will focus
on laser irradiation as the sole perturbation to the cells, leading to possible laser-induced
damage effects.
18
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Main cell death mechanisms and their morphological differences. Apoptosis and
necrosis are the two main mechanisms of cell death. While other mechanisms have garnered
increasing interest, they will not be the focus of this study. Figure modified from Krüger et al. 2022
[24].
3.2
Laser-induced cell damage mechanisms
When biological samples are exposed to laser irradiation, there are primarily three laser-
induced cell damage effects to consider: photothermal, photochemical and photomechan-
ical damage effects [25–27]. These effects are distinct in the type of damage they cause,
yet a single process may cause cells to experience multiple damage effects simultane-
ously. According to literature, the origin of the observed cell damage lies in the one-photon
and multiphoton absorption of laser photon energy by specific molecules within tissue,
known as chromophores, where linear and nonlinear absorption mechanisms can lead
to different damage effects [25–27]. Figure 3.4 showcases the absorption by molecules
as the origin of each damage effect, in which the processes will be further described.
Damage mechanisms described in this section may not appear in the cells as a result of
irradiation during the experiments.
3.2.1
Photothermal damage
Photothermal damage is classified as unwanted heating of cellular structures resulting
from light-tissue interactions. The effects are caused by the thermal relaxation that occurs
after chromophores within the tissue absorb photons, which raises the local temperature
and leads to the denaturation of biomolecules (see Figure 3.4). Mammalian cells thrive
at a temperature of 37 ◦C, but a small increase in local temperature can have devastat-
ing pathological effects. If the local temperature increases to 42 ◦C, then the heat will
already induce structural changes to proteins and break hydrogen bonds [28]. Increasing
the local temperature further to 45 ◦C will inactivate enzymes and affect the cell mem-
brane permeability [28]. The extent of cell damage increases with higher temperature.
Photothermal damage is considered a linear photodamage effect, meaning the proba-
bility of damage is dependent on one-photon absorption processes [7]. The presence of
photothermal effects is highly dependent on the tissue’s optical properties, specifically the
tissue’s absorption coefficient, which is dependent on the incident wavelength [29]. Figure
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4: Flow chart showcasing the laser-induced damage mechanisms and the main pro-
cesses involved in the laser-induction of biological samples. Photomechanical effects are de-
scribed as being caused by the optical breakdown. Figure taken from Débarre et al. [27].
3.5 features the absorption coefficient for the most relevant chromophores in biological
samples as a function of the absorption wavelength [30]. The most critical endogenous
absorber in the optical window of unstained cells and tissues is water, which represents
at least 70% of the total cell mass [7, 31].
3.2.2
Photochemical damage
Photochemical damage is cell damage induced by chemical changes resulting from light-
tissue interactions. As mentioned previously, the process initially involves the absorption
of light by chromophores, leading to multiple pathways that result in biomolecule disso-
ciation and increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [27]. ROS is a class
of reactive oxygen-containing molecules that are an integral part of the cell’s metabolic
processes [32]. However, an excessive amount of ROS can be damaging to the cell’s
function, such as causing lipid peroxidation and inducing DNA damage (see Appendix
A.1 for more examples) [32, 33]. Different types of ROS have varying damaging effects
on cells depending on their reactivity. The properties of each ROS molecule will not be
presented; their effects have been thoroughly reviewed by Murphy et al. [34].
One possible pathway is for the excited electron to change its spin multiplicity from an ex-
cited singlet to an excited triplet. This process can happen due to overlapping vibrational
levels of singlet and triplet states. From this point, ROS are produced in the presence of
oxygen via two types of reactions: Type I and Type II (see Figure 3.6) [35, 36]. Alternative
relaxation pathways following chromophore absorption can contribute to ROS generation,
including alterations in the redox state and molecular dissociation within chromophores
[27, 37].
The final major pathway for ROS production is photoionisation, which can subsequently
lead to the formation of a low-density plasma in the cell due to the increasing number
of free electrons being generated [38]. Plasma formation induces additional photochem-
20
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Absorption coefficients as functions of the absorption wavelength for chromophores
present in biological samples. Figure taken from Strohm et al. [30].
ical damage through free-electron interactions with oxygen, causing the dissociation of
biomolecules such as DNA [19].
3.2.3
Photomechanical damage
Photomechanical damage refers to cell damage characterised by the deformation and de-
struction of local structures. This damage effect may result from microscopic shockwaves
that directly damage local structures, or from thermoeleastic stresses induced by laser-
generated heat [38]. Shockwaves are generated by optical breakdown, which occurs
when low-density plasma becomes unconfined, which typically happens at laser irradi-
ances in the TW/cm2 range [7, 27].
Figure 3.6: The light energy excites the absorber from the singlet ground state to the singlet
excited state. The excited absorber can intersystem cross to the excited triplet state, leading to
two photochemical reactions that produce ROS. In the Type I reaction, the absorber undergoes
electron transfer with a neighbouring molecule, forming free oxygen-containing radicals. In the
Type II reaction, the absorber reacts directly with oxygen, producing singlet oxygen. Figure taken
from Liu et al. 2015 [36].
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
21
==PAGE:28==
Additionally, it is reported that the optical breakdown threshold for water is highly depen-
dent on pulse duration, with a 100-fold reduction in threshold observed when decreasing
the pulse duration from 6 ns to 100 fs [7]. These findings suggest that photomechanical
damage induction depends on nonlinear absorption processes that are strongly depen-
dent on peak laser parameters, such as peak irradiance. Figure 3.7 shows an overview
of the processes, from the chromophore absorbing the pulsed laser light to optical break-
down and subsequent shockwaves.
Figure 3.7: Overview of processes leading up to low-density plasma formation and subsequent
shockwaves. (a) The sample initially absorbs the photon energy from the pulsed laser source.
(b) The absorbed energy converts to heat, resulting in ablation of the sample and subsequent
vapor formation. (c) The vapor is condensed into a plume, leading to absorption and scattering
of the photons. This induces further heating and ionisation, which leads to the formation of a low-
density plasma and subsequent shockwaves. Reproduced from figure published on webpage by
Dr. Steven Rehse and University of Windsor [39].
22
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:29==
4
Literature Review on Cell Damage
This chapter presents key findings from a literature review aimed at establishing the state
of the art in laser-induced cell damage research, focusing on studies using femtosecond
pulsed laser systems. The objective is to identify gaps in the laser parameter thresholds
across different outcome assessments and cell types, and to provide a deeper under-
standing of the field. The number of laser parameters will be limited to the most relevant
to provide a better comparison to the results of this study.
A significant problem in many studies is the inability to reproduce experimental condi-
tions. Parameters such as beam area and irradiance have been omitted or estimated
from some literature, leaving the curious user to calculate them themselves. However,
this also means assumptions will have to be made, such as whether the back focal plane
of the objective is filled for the beam to be diffraction-limited.
To represent the literature in the field of laser-induced cell damage research, most laser
parameters have been calculated manually. The manual calculations utilise the definitions
described in Section 2.4. This has been done to present the data gathered as consistently
as possible, enabling accurate comparisons with other literature.
4.1
Overview of studies
The near-infrared wavelength is widely used in laser-induced cell damage research. This
is due to its high penetration depth and low tissue scattering properties, which are ben-
eficial for in vivo and in vitro studies. This trend is also reflected in Figure 4.1, where
numerous studies employ NIR lasers to investigate laser-induced cell damage. All the
Figure 4.1: Plot showcasing literature with their respective wavelength and pulse duration. Inset
shows a closeup of the 730-850 nm wavelength range and pulse duration range of 100-225 fs.
The legend displays the damage outcome investigated in the study.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
23
==PAGE:30==
relevant literature shown in the figures is presented in Appendices B.1 and B.2, along
with inherent and manually calculated system parameters.
Among the NIR wavelengths tested for cell damage, 800 nm has been widely utilised for
cell damage studies. Figure 4.1 showcases this very clearly for the literature that has
been reviewed. A possible reason is that the Ti:Sapphire—a very popular tunable laser
used in various studies—has the highest efficiency at 800 nm [40]. Additionally, a gap ex-
ists in the 800-1000 nm wavelength range, where only one data point was found. Using
a wavelength in this range could be a valuable area of investigation for this work. Addi-
tionally, using a commonly used wavelength, such as 800 nm, would enable meaningful
comparison points with existing and future studies.
Another observation that can be taken from Figure 4.1 is the wide use of the pulse duration
range spanning from 150-200 fs, and the lack of studies below a pulse duration of 150 fs,
which inherent limitations of current systems could explain. The investigation of specific
cell damage besides death, such as DNA damage, oxidative stress, and cell proliferation,
is suggested to warrant greater attention than that of cell viability.
Relevant laser parameters in the field include the (cumulative) fluence and average irra-
diance. An overview of each study, with its respective irradiance and fluence, is shown
in Figure 4.2. DNA damage has been extensively investigated by exposing cells to a flu-
ence in the range of a few hundred J/cm2 and an average irradiance of a few MW/cm2.
However, caution is warranted in interpreting each point as a possible threshold for all cell
types. Figure 4.2 showcases a potential gap between 5 and 20 MW/cm2, which could be
a valuable area of investigation.
In early laser-induced cell damage studies, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were pri-
marily used in this field, with pioneering work by K. König [41]. This work was supported by
other researchers, identifying laser parameter thresholds for proliferation decrease, DNA
Figure 4.2: Plot showcasing literature with their respective irradiance and fluence. The inset
shows a closeup of the 0-5 MW/cm2 irradiance range and 0-4000 J/cm2 fluence range. The legend
displays the damage outcome investigated in the study.
24
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Plot showcasing literature with their respective average irradiance and total fluence.
The inset shows a closeup of the 0-5 MW/cm2 irradiance range and 0-4000 J/cm2 fluence range.
The legend displays the sample type investigated in the study.
damage induction and cell death in CHO cells [7, 42–44]. Therefore, a lot of the litera-
ture that exists involves investigations of CHO cells (see Figure 4.3). Presently, various
cell types have been used to investigate laser-induced cell damage, including HeLa cells,
adding complexity to the field [26, 45]. This is because different cell types exhibit distinct
metabolic profiles and stress responses [46]. Figure 4.3–an identical plot to Figure 4.2,
but the legend showcases sample type instead of damage outcome–suggests that vary-
ing kinds of samples have different parameter thresholds. For example, Neuro2A cells
was reported to exhibit oxidative stress at a higher average irradiance threshold (∼20
MW/cm2) than skin samples in a different study (∼3 MW/cm2) [47, 48].
4.2
International regulations
When it comes to international regulations, practitioners of biomedical optics must ad-
here to laser exposure limits. IEC (International Electrotechnical Commision), ICNIRP
(International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection), and ISO (International
Organisation for Standardization) are among the key international bodies responsible for
establishing industry and medical standards for laser safety in human exposure.
Each has published separate guidelines specifying exposure limits for different wave-
lengths, tailored to either eye or skin irradiation (ICNIRP 2013a, ISO 15004-2:2024, IEC
60825-1). As of now, the only freely accessible documents are ICNIRP 2013a, which cov-
ers the skin and eye exposure, and ISO 15004-2:2024, which covers eye exposure [49,
50]. Skin exposure is most closely aligned with this study, so we will highlight the ICNIRP
2013a guidelines and compare them with other thresholds reported in the literature.
A potential critique of the 2013a report is its use of the term ”exposure duration” in its guide-
lines. This term may cause ambiguity, as it refers to the exposure time of a continuous-
wave laser but also to the pulse duration of a single pulse from a pulsed laser. Additionally,
if multiple pulses are used, the total exposure duration is determined in the same manner
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.4: ICNIRP safety thresholds plotted with data points from two studies. Notice that the
fluence unit used is J/cm2 rather than MJ/cm2 to represent the data better. The inset displays the
ICNIRP fluence limit for an exposure duration of 100 ns.
as for a continuous-wave laser. This inconsistency could lead to confusion when read-
ing the guidelines for different laser types, necessitating a clear distinction in thresholds
between pulsed and continuous-wave lasers. Additionally, differences in thresholds may
occur between different laser types, as pulsed lasers have inherently different properties.
Therefore, a correction factor is introduced in the ICNIRP guidelines to account for the
inherent properties of a pulsed laser in the retinal exposure limits [49].
Their skin exposure limits are expressed in both kW/m2 and J/m2, depending on the
exposure duration, and should instead be separated to distinguish between irradiance and
fluence thresholds. Incorporating the ICNIRP thresholds into the literature review reveals
safety thresholds that are much lower than those reported in the respective studies for
each cell type (see Figure 4.4). This questions the legitimacy of the fluence thresholds set
by ICNIRP, as cellular-scale studies show much higher thresholds, but a counterargument
could be that the guidelines are cautionary.
Because total fluence is calculated by multiplying irradiance by exposure duration, the
high fluence values reported in other studies may be reflected in the literature using much
higher irradiances. Another plausible explanation for the discrepancy may be that they use
a different ”fluence” definition, as a fluence can also be defined as pulse energy per unit
area, known as the per-pulse fluence. Figure 4.5 showcases the ICNIRP and literature
data points as per-pulse fluence limits. The presence of data points within the exposure
limits could suggest that this fluence definition was used to set the exposure limits. This
further underscores the need for stronger standardisation and clearly defined thresholds
to avoid possible confusion.
26
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.5: ICNIRP safety thresholds plotted with literature data points. The per-pulse fluence is
showcased instead of the total (cumulative) fluence. The inset displays the ICNIRP fluence limit
for an exposure duration of 100 ns.
4.3
End of review
This literature review concludes that assessing laser-induced cell damage is highly com-
plex due to its multi-parametric nature. Numerous physical and biological factors must be
considered, depending on the type of cell damage being visualised and quantified. Specif-
ically, from the review, the cell viability and integrity depend on the interplay between
laser parameters, such as wavelength, irradiance, and fluence, as well as the experimen-
tal setup and cell type. Additionally, the review of standard laser parameter thresholds
from ICNIRP has shown that stronger standardisation is needed to avoid possible confu-
sion. Ultimately, this review highlights the need for standardised reporting, which is a key
motivation for this thesis.
No laser-induced damage studies on the HT-29 cell line were found, highlighting the nov-
elty of this work. A pulse duration of 100 fs will also be used in this work, a value with
a single data point in this review. Additionally, this work from the literature review has
chosen 800 nm as the primary wavelength for the study due to its widespread use and
the many data points available for comparison. The novelty in this work regarding 800
nm will be the filling of the irradiance and fluence gaps identified in this review, with the
experimental configurations presented in the Materials and Methods section. A 1040
nm wavelength will be included as an additional wavelength in this work to investigate
wavelength dependence. A later comparison between ICNIRP and this work will not be
performed, as the nature of this work is different: it focuses on cumulative fluence rather
than per-pulse fluence. Accordingly, the thesis aims to contribute to standardised report-
ing by suggesting a protocol for irradiating mammalian cells and assessing cell viability
through staining and subsequent fluorescence imaging.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
27
==PAGE:34==
28
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:35==
5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Cell Culture
The human colon adenocarcinoma cell line HT-29 (ATCC HTB-38) was obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, [51]) through the Technical University of Den-
mark. The cells were maintained in 10 mL of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM,
4.5 g/L D-glucose, L-glutamine, 25mM HEPES, without phenol red and sodium pyruvate)
supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum and 1 % (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin,
hereafter referred to as growth medium. Cultures were maintained in T75 culture flasks
at 37 ◦C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5 % CO2, hereafter referred to as standard
incubation conditions throughout this chapter. Every 2-3 days, the growth medium was
aspirated, cells were rinsed with 8 mL of Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS)
to remove waste products and 10 mL of fresh growth medium was added. DPBS will be
referred to as PBS for the remainder of this chapter.
5.2
Irradiation and Characterisation Protocols
This section presents the protocols used to irradiate and characterise HT-29 cell viability.
The cell damage study procedure consists of four steps. The protocol steps are shown
in Figure 5.1. Figure 5.1(A) shows the calibration of the system’s average powers, as
a power calibration is required to know the power output of the system. The system
works by inserting a percentage of the laser’s average power, but because of other optical
components in the MPM, it is not an accurate measure to compare with the manufacturer’s
values.
Figure 5.1(B) illustrates the irradiation of the cells that are attached to the bottom of the
wells. This was done for two different wavelengths, 800 nm and 1040 nm. Figure 5.1(C)
showcases the fluorescence imaging of HT-29 cells stained with a cell viability stain kit.
Figure 5.1(D) displays the final step of the protocol, in which the fluorescence images
are preprocessed and analysed using computer software. The MPM system used for
irradiation and fluorescence-based capture of cell viability, which is a replica of a TIMAHC
by Rosenegger et al. [52]. The specifications of the MPM setup used in the experiment
is found in Table 5.1
Figure 5.1: Protocol steps for irradiation and cell viability characterisation of HT-29 cells. Image in
(A) is taken from Thorlabs product page [53], and images in (C) and (D) are taken from Biorender.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
29
==PAGE:36==
Table 5.1: MPM specifications for the irradiation and fluorescence-based imaging. The inherent
laser parameters are taken from Coherent’s Chameleon NX product sheet [54]. The beam waists
are based on the refractive index of water (n = 1.33). The back focal plane of the objective is
assumed to be filled, meaning beam waists are assumed to be diffraction-limited and are calculated
based on the Rayleigh criterion (0.61λ/NA).
Property
Value
Pulse duration (fs)
100
Repetition rate (MHz)
80
Beam diameter of laser (mm)
1.2
Objective NA
1
Refractive index of PBS
1.33
Beam waist in PBS at 800 nm (m2)
3.67×10−13
Beam waist in PBS at 1040 nm (m2) 4.77×10−13
5.2.1
Power calibration of MPM
The average powers of the scanning MPM system were measured using the Thorlabs
S120C photodiode power sensor, which measures a power range of 50 nW - 50 mW.
The average beam power at the focal point was measured without scanning. The mea-
surements were continued until a percentage was reached that yielded 50 mW. The mea-
surements were performed three times at separate sessions to obtain a more accurate
estimate of the average powers, and a mean value was taken for each average power
(see Appendix C). The mean values were plotted together and fit with a 3rd-order poly-
nomial to interpolate average powers above 50 mW, as this provided the most accurate
fit (see Figure 5.2). The equation was then used to estimate average powers exceeding
50 mW, due to equipment limitations.
Figure 5.2: Mean values of average powers plotted as a function of the power percentage with
error bars. The values are fit with a 3rd-order polynomial with the formula displayed.
30
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:37==
5.2.2
Field of view calibration
To determine the field of view (FOV) of the near-infrared (NIR) camera images, a cali-
bration ruler was used (Appendix D). Using FIJI (ImageJ) and the line measurement tool,
the mean value from five independent measurements was calculated. The resulting scale
was 2.7 pixels/μm or 0.37 μm/pixel, yielding an FOV of 380.4 μm × 475.5 μm (Figure D.1,
and Table D.1).
For the photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), the FOV of the irradiated images was established
using fluorescent beads with a defined diameter of 6 μm. FIJI (ImageJ) and the line
measurement tool were again used to measure the radius of multiple beads, and the
mean radius was used to calculate the spatial scale. This analysis resulted in an FOV of
330.2 μm × 330.2 μm, with a scale of 1.56 pixels/μm or 0.65 μm/pixel (Figure D.2, and
Table D.2).
5.2.3
Irradiation protocol
This section presents the protocol for irradiating HT-29 cells while minimising cell stress.
First, a 6-well tissue culture plate was selected as the substrate for cell attachment before
irradiation. Before inserting cells into the wells, a crosshair was drawn in the centre be-
hind each well with a permanent marker. Three middle corner sections were selected as
irradiation areas, and a control area (unmarked) was selected. This was done to facilitate
access and avoid irradiating marked areas (see Figure 5.3). This would yield a sample
size of three per condition and six controls.
Figure 5.4 shows the flowchart of all processes used for cell irradiation and will be ex-
plained in detail. Cells were subcultured into each well after the main T75 culture flask
Figure 5.3: Schematic of the 6-well plate with the permanent marker lines and irradiation areas.
Blue markers indicate crosshairs drawn with a permenant marker, red markers designate irradia-
tion areas and purple markers indicate control areas.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.4: Flow chart illustrating the laser irradiation procedure for HT-29 cells.
reached 80-90% confluency. The number of cells subcultured to each well varied depend-
ing on the day of irradiation, with approximately 7 × 105 cells being subcultured to each
well if the day of irradiation was two days after. If the irradiation was going to be performed
four days after subculturing, then approximately 3 × 105 cells were subcultured.
On the day of irradiation, the well to be irradiated was filled with PBS. The growth medium
in the other wells to be irradiated later was not replaced to avoid immersing them in PBS
for extended periods, thereby preventing further stress on the cells. The 6-well plate was
then placed on the stage, and the water-dipping objective was lowered to the active well
(see Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.5: Image of the stage and the water-dipping objective entering the 6-well plate.
32
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:39==
The average power, pixel dwell time and number of scans were set for each experiment.
Configurations for each experiment are displayed in Table 5.2, including average power,
beam area, irradiance, fluence and exposure time. The irradiation areas were located
using the NIR camera, and an image of the position was acquired for later relocation
of the area. The MPM was then adjusted to the focal plane of the cells and the area
was subsequently irradiated. The objective was then removed from the well, and PBS
was replaced with warm growth medium, again to avoid overstressing the cells. The
processes were then repeated for each well. After each well was irradiated, the 6-well
plate containing the cells was incubated for 1 hour under standard incubation conditions
to allow them to rest before viability staining.
Table 5.2: Combined laser parameters including irradiance and fluence values for all experiments.
*Average powers interpolated using 3rd order polynomial.
Sample
group
Avg. power
(mW)
Beam area
(m2)
Irradiance
(W/m2)
Fluence
(J/m2)
Pixel dwell time ×
no. of scans
800 nm — Fluence Series 1
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A1
14.83
4.23 × 10−13
3.51 × 1010 1.12 × 107
32µs × 10
B1
22.87
5.41 × 1010 1.73 × 107
C1
30.83
7.29 × 1010 2.33 × 107
D1
40.47
9.57 × 1010 3.06 × 107
E1
49.8
1.18 × 1011 3.78 × 107
F1
60∗
1.42 × 1011 4.54 × 107
800 nm — Fluence Series 2
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A2
50∗
4.23 × 10−13
1.18 × 1011 3.78 × 107
32µs × 10
B2
60∗
1.42 × 1011 4.54 × 107
C2
70∗
1.65 × 1011 5.30 × 107
D2
80∗
1.89 × 1011 6.05 × 107
E2
90∗
2.13 × 1011 6.81 × 107
F2
100∗
2.36 × 1011 7.57 × 107
1040 nm - Fluence Series
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A3
50∗
7.15 × 10−13
6.99 × 1010 2.24 × 107
32µs × 10
B3
62∗
8.67 × 1010 2.77 × 107
C3 (A2 eq.)
81∗
1.13 × 1011 3.63 × 107
D3 (B2 eq.)
100∗
1.40 × 1011 4.48 × 107
E3 (C2 eq.)
116∗
1.62 × 1011 5.19 × 107
F3 (D2 eq.)
135∗
1.89 × 1011 6.04 × 107
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
33
==PAGE:40==
Sample
group
Avg. power
(mW)
Beam area
(m2)
Irradiance
(W/m2)
Fluence
(J/m2)
Pixel dwell time ×
no. of scans
Constant Fluence Groups (40 mW)
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A4
40
4.23 × 10−13 9.57 × 1010
1.53 × 107
32µs × 5
D4
1.6µs × 100
B4
4.59 × 107
32µs × 15
E4
4.8µs × 100
C4
9.19 × 107
32µs × 30
F4
9.6µs × 100
Constant Fluence Groups (60 mW)
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A5
60∗
4.23 × 10−13 1.42 × 1011
2.27 × 107
32µs × 5
D5
1.6µs × 100
B5
6.82 × 107
32µs × 15
E5
4.8µs × 100
C5
1.36 × 108
32µs × 30
F5
9.6µs × 100
Irradiance Series
Control
–
–
–
–
–
A6
100∗
4.23 × 10−13
2.36 × 1011
4.54 × 107
32µs × 6
B6
60∗
1.42 × 1011
32µs × 10
C6
15
3.55 × 1010
32µs × 40
5.2.4
Viability staining protocol
To distinguish and quantify dead and live cells, a viability stain was required; in this case,
the Thermo Fisher Scientific LIVE/DEAD™Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit for Mammalian Cells
was used. The kit included calcein AM (CAM) for live cells and Ethidium homodimer-1
(EthD-1) for dead cells. See Figure 5.6 for each process step of the protocol.
After the cells had rested for an hour, the growth medium in each well was replaced with
200 µL staining solution. The ideal staining solution for fluorescence imaging was found
to be 1:3:1000 (5:15:5000 µL) CAM:EthD-1:PBS. The cells were then incubated for 30
minutes under standard incubation conditions.
The stain was replaced with PBS for each well, and the 6-well plate was taken to the stage
in the MPM. The water-dipping objective was inserted into a well, and irradiation areas
were located using the NIR camera. The fluorescence in each area was subsequently
captured. Two different excitation wavelengths were used: 985 nm for the live cell imaging
and 1090 nm for the dead cell imaging, due to fluorescence cross-talk (see Appendix L.1
for excitation and emission spectra with emission filters). After capturing the images, the
objective was lifted and the process was repeated for each well. At the end of the imaging
session, the cells were discarded, and the images were ready for analysis.
34
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.6: Flow chart illustrating the LIVE/DEAD fluorescence imaging procedure for HT-29 cells
5.3
Image Analysis
5.3.1
Image Pre-processing Script
Before quantitative analysis through cell counting, all images were pre-processed to con-
firm uniform intensity profiles, improved contrast, and consistent brightness across the
different datasets. The current process was designed to minimise imaging artefacts such
as shading and contrast variations that could affect automated thresholding and segmen-
tation at the second step of the process.
The pre-processing procedure was implemented in MATLAB R2025a, with the steps that
are summarized below. The complete MATLAB script is provided in the Appendix S. An
overview of the workflow is shown in Figure 5.7 and will be described accordingly.
Before/After Visualization
Intensity Profiles
Histogram
Select a Folder and load 
images (.tif, .tiff, .png, 
.jpg)
Global Contrast 
Enhancement (imadjust())
Intensity Profiles (row 
and column maxima)
Polynomial Fitting 
(polyfit(), polyval())
Gain Maps
(remat(), 
imresize())
Adaptive Bottom-Half 
Brightness Correction
Compine Correction 
Map(I_corrected = 
Icontrast .* 
correctionMap)
Generate Output
Corrected Images
Start
Next 
Image/End
Normalize 
Brightness
Smooth Background 
Gaussian filter σ=1
Smooth Background
Gaussian filters  (row 
σ=5, column σ=2)
Combine Gain Maps 
(vMap .* hMap)
Figure 5.7: Flow chart illustrating the MATLAB image pre-processing workflow applied prior to
cell segmentation and counting.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
35
==PAGE:42==
1. Image Acquisition and Loading
• The user selects a folder containing all microscopy images (supported formats:
.tif, .tiff, .png, .jpg).
• The program reads each image in sequence and extracts its name and dimen-
sions for processing.
2. Global Contrast Enhancement
• Each image is processed using the global contrast enhancement using MAT-
LAB’s imadjust function, which linearly stretches the image intensity values
between the lower and upper saturation limits (determined automatically by
stretchlim, defaults to [0.01 0.99]).
• As a result, an expansion to the dynamic range and an enhancement of image
features was defined, increasing the visibility of both bright and dark regions
while preserving relative brightness.
3. Intensity Profile Estimation and Correction
• The row-wise and column-wise maximum intensity profiles are derived to as-
sess non-uniform illumination along vertical and horizontal axes.
• Third-degree polynomial fits are applied to both profiles to obtain smoothed
background intensity curves.
• Because of slight fluctuations caused by noise, both profiles were smoothed
using direction-dependent Gaussian filters. A smoothing factor σ = 5 was
applied to the vertical profile to refine sharper top-to-bottom intensity gradients.
Another smoothing factor, σ = 2, was used for the horizontal, more uniform
profile.
• Using the inverse of these profiles creates gain maps that correct darker re-
gions by increasing their intensity and suppress overexposed regions.
• The values are limited to the range [0.8–1.2] to prevent overcorrection.
4. Adaptive Bottom-Half Intensity Compensation
• In the raw images, due to the microscope misalignment and depth of focus
gradients, the lower half of the image is darker.
• The algorithm measures the mean intensity of the upper and lower halves. It
applies an adaptive boost to the bottom region, scaling its brightness to a factor
of two.
5. Correction Map Application and Normalization
• The vertical and horizontal gain maps, as well as the bottom-half correction
(steps 3 and 4), are integrated into a single correction map.
• At the final correction map, a slight spatial smoothing is applied using a Gaus-
sian filter (with a small standard deviation, σ = 1). This step removed small
discontinuities and secured a continuous correction across the image.
• The original image is multiplied by this map, and the result is rescaling the
corrected image using the ratio of the mean intensity of the original contrast-
enhanced image to that of the corrected image. This is a global scaling factor
36
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:43==
that preserves how much to brighten (ratio < 1) or darken (ratio > 1) the cor-
rected image so that its overall brightness remains unchanged.
• The output is converted to greyscale using the function mat2gray() and rescaled
to the range [0–1] for uniformity.
6. Output Generation and Quality Control
• For each image, the following are automatically saved in separate subfolders:
– Corrected Image (contrast and intensity adjusted)
– Before/After Comparison Figure
– Row and Column Intensity Profiles (showing uniformity improvement)
– Intensity Histogram (before and after correction)
• All corrected images are stored in a folder for further analysis.
This pre-processing script modifies image brightness and contrast to optimise cell seg-
mentation and counting, which is applied in the next step. Some of the samples for dwell
pixel time, scan repetition, and same fluence investigation have been processed with a
gamma of 0.4 in the stretchlim() function to enhance contrast.
5.3.2
Automated Cell Counting on FIJI Macro
After the intensity correction of the pre-processing step above, all images were analysed
using an automated FIJI (ImageJ) macro developed to optimise live and dead cell counting
and export quantitative data in .csv format. This script automated image loading, seg-
mentation, and ROI (Region of Interest) export, providing consistency and reproducibility
across all datasets. The complete FIJI (ImageJ) macro is provided in Appendix R, and an
overview of the workflow is shown in Figure 5.8.
1. Folder Selection and Output Initialization
• The macro suggests to the user to select a folder containing the .tif images
for analysis.
Replicate image and 
Label ROIs 
Add Scale Bar
Save Image (.tif)
Select a Folder 
(getDirectory)
Create “Results” 
output directory
Format “Summary”.csv 
file
open
Crop Region of 
Interest (ROI)
(makeRectangl
e, run(“crop”))
Adjust Brightness and 
Contrast
Make a 
Binary/Watershed
Save ROI Data 
(.csv, .zip)
Start
Next 
Image/End
Apply Otsu 
Threshold
Analyse Particles 
For each 
image
Morpgological 
Filtering (White Top 
Hat)
Attach Count to 
Summary file
Clear 
Figure 5.8:
Flow chart illustrating the automated FIJI (ImageJ) macro workflow used for
LIVE/DEAD image processing and cell counting.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
37
==PAGE:44==
• An output directory named Results is automatically created in the same folder.
• A summary file (Summary_Cell_Counts.csv) is prepared with column headers
(“Image, Cell_Count”) to store results for all processed images.
2. Image Loading and Cropping
• The macro script loops through all .tif or .tiff files in the selected directory.
• For each image, a Region of Interest (ROI) is defined using the makeRectangle()
command to create the initial image, because different dwell pixel times were
used during imaging, resulting in different image sizes.
• Due to an issue with the scanning program, 9.6 µs is the dwell time it takes to
deliver the whole image. For the rest of the experiments. Faster dwell times
yielded a compressed left side of the initial image.
• Several predefined cropping coordinates can be alternated depending on the
imaging dwell pixel time that was chosen.
• The image is spatially calibrated to micrometres using run("Set Scale...").
3. Preprocessing and Enhancement
• The macro opens the Brightness/Contrast tool and prompts the user to adjust
contrast enhancement to improve visibility.
• A morphological white top-hat filter (Morphological Filters) with a disk radius of
100 pixels is applied to remove unbalanced background intensity and highlight
cell regions.
4. Segmentation and Binarization
• The Otsu automatic thresholding method (Auto Threshold, method=Otsu) is
applied to highlight cells from the background.
• A binary mask is applied (Make Binary).
• Watershed segmentation separates connected cell regions.
5. Particle Analysis and Counting
• The Analyze Particles command counts all cell-like regions above a defined
size threshold that utilises the cell size in our experiments (≥15 µm, and some-
times 10 µm for dead cell counts, due to the difficulty in identifying them from
the noisy background).
• The total number of detected cells (nROIs) is automatically reported and printed
in the FIJI log window.
• ROIss measurements are exported to a per-image .csv file, and all ROIs are
savedass a .zip file.
6. Duplication and Visualization
• A duplicate of the processed image is created.
• All ROIs are displayed (roiManager("Show All with Labels")).
• A 50 µm white scale bar is added to the bottom right corner with the appropriate
size.
38
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:45==
• The duplicate image is saved as a new .tif file in the output directory with the
watershed and ROIs.
7. Summary File and Tidy
• For each image, the name and corresponding cell count are attached to the
summary file Summary_Cell_Counts.csv.
• When an image is saved, the macro clears all temporary results, resets the
ROI Manager, and closes all open files before moving to the next image.
Additional macro scripts were generated to crop and composite the images (Appendix S),
as well as to set scale bars in the NIR images (Appendix T).
5.4
Statistical Power
Regarding the inspection of samples and the selection of statistical methods, an a priori
power analysis was performed using the GPowerMac_3.1.9.6 software to assess the sam-
ple sizes and the corresponding effect sizes. The irradiated conditions of three regions
from each sample were initially compared with the pooled controls using the standard
Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test (two groups, one-tailed, α = 0.05, power = 0.80), using
sample sizes of ν1 = 3 and ν2 = 6. An additional Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test (two
groups, two-tailed, α = 0.05, power = 0.80) was applied to compare samples across each
pair of conditions, resulting in sample sizes of ν1 = ν2 = 3.
During the analysis, several comparisons yielded extremely large standardised mean dif-
ferences, with effect sizes reaching up to d ≈16.6. When such values were entered into
the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney option in G*Power, the software returned “N/A” for the re-
quired sample size. This occurs because G*Power internally converts the standardised
mean difference d into the rank-based effect size p1 = Pr(X < Y ) under the assumption
of normally distributed groups.
For very large effect sizes, the assumed distributions under the null and alternative hy-
potheses are separated by many standard deviations and show essentially no overlap.
Consequently, p1 approaches 1, causing the variance of the rank-sum statistic used in the
Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test to approach zero. As a result, the normal approximation
on which the power calculation is based becomes invalid, and G*Power cannot compute
a finite sample size, producing the “N/A” output.
To avoid this mathematical limitation, the a priori power analyses for these comparisons
were repeated using the two-sample t-test between the difference in means of two in-
dependent groups.
In this analysis, the effect size was still defined as Cohen’s d =
∆/σ, assuming equal variances between groups. Although some individual comparisons
achieved the desired power (above 80%), others were underpowered due to small sam-
ple sizes and large variability. Because the overall statistical power is inconsistent across
conditions, the use of significance testing would lead to unreliable probability values. For
this reason, statistical significance tests were not applied to the results of this work.
The parameters of the t-tests remained the same. The effect sizes (d = ∆/σ) were calcu-
lated from the observed mean differences and the pooled standard deviations according
to the following equation:
σ =
√
(n1 −1)σ2
1 + (n2 −1)σ2
2
(n1 + n2 −2)
,
n1 ̸= n2
(5.1)
where n1, n2 are the sample sizes and σ1, σ2 the standard deviations of each group.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.3: Single tail power analysis for each control condition in high fluence levels experiment
6.1.2 at 800 nm.
Well Comparison
SD within
each group
Effect size
(d = ∆/σ)
α
Power
(1–β)
Ratio
N2/N1
Required
n/group
Current
n/group
A
Irradiated
vs
Controls
1.275
1.333
0.05
0.80
1.50
7/11
3/6
B
Irradiated
vs
Controls
3.012
3.652
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/4
3/6
C
Irradiated
vs
Controls
2.006
11.962
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
D
Irradiated
vs
Controls
10.215
3.338
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/4
4/6
E
Irradiated
vs
Controls
3.225
15.628
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
F
Irradiated
vs
Controls
3.544
16.648
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
Table 5.4: Pairwise comparisons between irradiated wells at the same fluence and between dif-
ferent irradiance conditions.
Well Comparison
Effect size
(d = ∆/σ)
α
Power
(1–β)
Ratio
N2/N1
Required
n/group
Current
n/group
A (32 µs / 6 scans / 2.36×1011 W/m2)
/ B (32 µs / 10 scans /
1.42×1011 W/m2)
2.139
0.05
0.80
1.00
5/5
3/3
A (32 µs / 6 scans / 2.36×1011 W/m2)
/ C (32 µs / 40 scans /
3.55×1010 W/m2)
3.330
0.05
0.80
1.00
3/3
3/3
B (32 µs / 10 scans / 1.42×1011 W/m2)
/ C (32 µs / 40 scans /
3.55×1010 W/m2)
4.719
0.05
0.80
1.00
3/3
3/3
In the case of comparing two groups with equal numbers of samples, the formula for the
effect size is modified to:
σ =
√
σ2
1 + σ2
2
2
,
n1 = n2
(5.2)
In that section, an overview of the results from the two key experiments is provided (Ta-
ble 5.3, and Table 5.4). Some illustrations have also chosen to describe the statistical
results of the proper sample size (Figures 5.9, 5.10) . The complete results, including all
supporting tables, are included in Appendices M, N, O, P.
It is important to emphasise that the two-sample t-test was used only for the purpose of
calculating statistical power. For the above reasons, the results in the present work are
presented descriptively, using mean, median, standard deviation, and standard error to
summarise the observed trends, rather than indicating statistical significance. The stan-
40
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:47==
dard deviation and standard error of the mean are calculated with the following formula:
σ =
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2
n −1
(5.3)
SEM =
σ
√n
or
SEMDiff =
√
σ2
1 + σ2
2
(5.4)
where xi is each data set, and ¯x the mean of this sample.
0,05
0,15
0,25
0,35
0,45
0,55
0,65
0,75
0,85
0,95
0
5
10
15
20
25
Total sample size
 = 1,333
Effect size d
t tests - Means: Difference between two independent means (two groups)
Tail(s) = One, Allocation ratio N2/N1 = 1,5, α err prob = 0,05, Effect size d = 1,333
Power (1-β err prob)
(a) Power curve for effect size d = 1.333.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
critical t = 1,7459
α
β
(b) Distribution overlap showing α and β regions.
Figure 5.9: (a) Power as a function of total sample size for effect size d = 1.333. (b) Illustration of
the null (red) and alternative distribution (blue).
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
41
==PAGE:48==
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
critical t = 2,306
α
2
β
(a) d = 2.139
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
critical t = 2,7764
α
2
β
(b) d = 3.330
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
critical t = 2,7764
α
2
β
(c) d = 4.719
Figure 5.10: Distribution overlap plots for effect sizes (a) d = 2.139, (b) d = 3.330, and (c) d = 4.719
at the same fluence experiment 6.4, showing regions corresponding to the null and alternative
distribution.
42
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:49==
6
Cell Viability Results
HT-29 cell viability for each sample was assessed by acquiring fluorescence images of
the cells using a multiphoton microscope (MPM). The cells were post-irradiation stained
with a LIVE/DEAD™cell viability assay that is specific to live and necrotic cells. The
fluorescence for live and dead cells was captured using excitation wavelengths of 985 nm
and 1090 nm, respectively. Different pixel dwell times were used during cell fluorescence
imaging as the study progressed, resulting in cropped images that varied across sessions
due to a system fault. Therefore, the live/dead fluorescence images presented differ in
size.
Results were analysed using image processing in Matlab and subsequent automatic cell
counting in Fiji (ImageJ). Cell viability was reported as a ratio of live to dead cells, reflect-
ing differences in cell density across experiments. Additionally, due to the nature of the
experiment, more control cell replicates were acquired than irradiated cell replicates (see
Section 5 for details of the experimental setups).
Four investigations were conducted in this work. (i) The first investigation assessed the
impact of laser fluence on cell viability at 800 nm, varying only the average power to
control the fluence. (ii) The second investigation would evaluate the effect of wavelength
on cell viability, changing the average power exclusively to control the fluence. However,
the fluence was approximately matched to that used in (i) to provide the best possible
one-to-one comparison. (iii) The third investigation would assess the impact of the pixel
dwell time and the number of scans, while keeping the fluence constant. (iv) Lastly, an
assessment of the irradiance dependence would be performed while keeping the fluence
constant.
For the results relating to laser irradiance and fluence, it was assumed that the beam
diameter was diffraction-limited, meaning the back focal plane was fully filled. Addition-
ally, each experiment was conducted with cells at the same passage number to ensure
consistency within each sample and between samples and controls.
The terms ”exposure time” and ”pixel dwell time” refer to the total time the cells have been
exposed and the time a single pixel is exposed during a single scan, respectively. In this
study, fluence is the cumulative dose to which a sample is exposed; it is therefore calcu-
lated by multiplying the irradiance by the exposure time (see Section 2.4.3 for calculation
details).
6.1
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at 800 nm
To investigate the relationship between laser fluence and cell viability, cultured HT-29
cells were exposed to varying energy densities using an ultrafast laser at 800 nm. The
system’s average power was exclusively adjusted to vary the fluence. Each cell sample
was scanned ten times with a pixel dwell time of 32 µs, resulting in a total exposure time
of 320 µs.
6.1.1
First Experiment
The experimental configurations for each sample group are displayed in Table 5.2 in Meth-
ods and Materials. The mean, median and standard deivations of the acquired cell viabil-
ities for each fluence value used in the experiment are shown in Table 6.1. Furthermore,
Figure 6.1 and 6.2 graphically showcase the raw cell viability values for each replicate
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
43
==PAGE:50==
Table 6.1: Mean, median and standard deviation of cell viability for each fluence level in the first
experiment at 800 nm.
Fluence (J/m2)
Mean viability ± SEM (%)
Median viability (%)
Standard
deviation (%)
1.12×107 (A1)
96.9 ± 1.1
96.1
1.9
1.73×107 (B1)
95.9 ± 2.9
98.7
5.1
2.33×107 (C1)
95.3 ± 2.7
98.0
4.7
3.06×107 (D1)
92.8 ± 1.4
93.1
2.4
3.78×107 (E1)
93.7 ± 1.4
92.7
2.4
4.54×107 (F1)
77.9 ± 8.8
77.9
12.5
Control
96.0 ± 1.7
96.9
4.2
as well as the mean and its standard error in their respective sample groups. Live/dead
fluorescence images for each replicate are shown in Appendix E.1 and E.2.
The heatmap shows variability in cell viability across replicates, highlighting the impor-
tance of sample size. For example, one of the control replicates has a relatively lower
viability (87.9%) than the other control samples (between 96.7% and 100%). This lower
viability may be due to external factors, such as sample handling and cell environment,
which will be discussed in a later section.
Nonetheless, Figure 6.2 shows a consistent mean cell viability for a fluence range between
1.12 × 107 J/m2 and 3.78 × 107 J/m2 with no decreasing trend. A fall-off in mean cell
viability is observed with sample group F1, using a fluence of 4.54 × 107 J/m2 at 800 nm,
highlighting a possible threshold at that point.
Figure 6.1: Cell viability heatmap as a function of fluence for each replicate.
44
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.2: Individual and mean cell viabilities with error bars as a function of fluence. The inset
highlights non-control points.
Figure 6.3 shows the live/dead fluorescence images of a control and the two replicates
exposed at a fluence of 4.54 × 107 J/m2. The control shows no dead cells, suggesting the
cells are in an ideal environment. While the cells irradiated at 4.54 × 107 J/m2 showcase
a higher number of dead cells in the fluorescence images, meaning that cells died as
a result of the irradiation. Overlapping of live cell signals and dead cell signals can be
observed in Figure 6.3b and 6.3c. Possible reasons and consequences for this overlap
will be discussed in a later section.
(a) Control Rep 6, CV = 100%
(b) F1 Rep 1, CV = 86.8%
(c) F1 Rep 2, CV = 69.1%
Figure 6.3: Fluorescence images of the F1 replicates 1 and 2 and the control replicate 6. Red
indicates dead cell nuclei; green indicates live cells.
Only two replicates were obtained from the sample group exposed to a fluence of 4.54×
J/m2, and both data points had a large spread from each other. This emphasises the high
uncertainty in making a conclusive statement about the fluence threshold with a small
sample size. Due to the limited effect of fluence on cell viability in this experiment, a
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
45
==PAGE:52==
second experiment was planned with higher fluence values to identify a possible fluence
threshold.
6.1.2
Second Experiment with Higher Fluence Levels
Table 6.2: Mean, median and standard deviation of cell viability for each fluence level in the
second experiment at 800 nm.
Fluence (J/m2)
Mean viability ± SEM (%)
Median (%)
SD (%)
3.78×107 (A2)
97.8 ± 1.3
98.9
2.3
4.54×107 (B2)
88.5 ± 1.8
87.9
3.1
5.30×107 (C2)
75.5 ± 2.2
74.2
3.7
6.05×107 (D2)
65.4 ± 11.0
70.1
19.1
6.81×107 (E2)
49.1 ± 3.4
48.1
6.0
7.57×107 (F2)
40.5 ± 3.8
43.4
6.6
Control
99.5 ± 0.2
99.5
0.4
The second experiment was planned to investigate cell viability at higher fluence levels.
The two highest fluence levels from the previous experiment were utilised again for this
experiment, to gather more data on them. Experimental parameters for every sample
group are referred in Table 5.2 in the Methods and Materials section. All average powers
were interpolated due to limitations of the measurement equipment. Summary statistics of
cell viability values obtained at each fluence value are displayed in Table 6.2, showing an
interesting trend in which the cell viability steeply declines when the fluence level reaches
4.54 × 107 J/m2. This was previously shown in the previous experiment, but here it is
shown with much less deviation.
The heatmap in Figure 6.4 showcases the steep decline in cell viability visually across the
board at fluence levels above 4.54×107 J/m2 for each replicate. The lowest cell viability
recorded was 33% for cells irradiated at 7.57 × 107 J/m2 (F2), which is additionally a
considerable drop compared to the other F2 replicates. The large variation in cell viability
values across some sample groups could suggest that individual cell death processes
occur randomly when exposed to a high fluence. The variation was very high for cells
exposed to a total fluence of 6.05× 107 J/m2, which had the highest standard deviation
recorded (19.1%).
The graph in Figure 6.5 shows a visually larger decline in mean cell viability at higher
fluence values than in the first experiment. The declining trend starts at 4.54 × 107 J/m2,
which was also observed in the first experiment. The graph also suggests that a fluence
of approximately 6.81 × 107 J/m2 kills 50% of the cell population with the specific MPM
configuration.
Figure 6.6 shows the fluorescence images corresponding to the median cell viability of
each irradiated sample, and it visually highlights the steep decline in cell viability that is
presented in the heatmap and plots. Additionally, overlap between live and dead cells is
again observed as in Figure 6.3, prompting a further discussion. Fluorescence images
for each replicate in the second experiment are supplied in Appendix F.1 and F.2.
46
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.4: Cell viability heatmap as a function of fluence for each replicate in the second exper-
iment at 800 nm.
Figure 6.5: Individual and mean cell viabilities with error bars as a function of fluence in the second
experiment at 800 nm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
47
==PAGE:54==
(a) A2 Rep 3, CV = 98.9%
(b) B2 Rep 1, CV = 87.8%
(c) C2 Rep 2, CV = 74.2%
(d) D2 Rep 3, CV = 70.1%
(e) E2 Rep 3, CV = 48.1%
(f) F2 Rep 2, CV = 43.4%
Figure 6.6: Overview of median live/dead fluorescence results across experimental conditions in
the second experiment using an 800 nm wavelength (A2-F2). Scale bars are 50 µm.
6.2
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell Viability at 1040 nm
Investigating the relationship between laser fluence and cell viability using 1040 nm in-
volved the same procedure as with 800 nm. The average power was adjusted exclusively,
as closely as possible, to match the fluence of the 800 nm second experiment.
Table 6.3: Mean, median, and standard deviation of cell viability for each fluence level in the first
experiment at 1040 nm.
Fluence (J/m2)
Mean viability ± SEM (%)
Median (%)
SD (%)
2.24 × 107 (A3)
99.0 ± 0.1
98.9
0.2
2.77 × 107 (B3)
98.8 ± 0.5
98.9
0.9
3.63 × 107 (C3)
97.6 ± 0.4
97.5
0.7
4.48 × 107 (D3)
98.7 ± 0.4
98.6
0.7
5.19 × 107 (E3)
97.3 ± 1.2
98.4
2.1
6.04 × 107 (F3)
95.1 ± 2.1
97.2
3.6
Control
98.9 ± 0.7
99.4
1.6
48
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:55==
However, due to human error, only fluence levels corresponding to sample groups A2-D2
were suitable for comparison (see Table 5.2 for parameters used for the sample groups).
The first two fluence values used in the 1040 nm experiment are substantially lower, and
this discrepency is therefore highlighted. Each cell sample was scanned ten times with a
pixel dwell time of 32 µs, yielding a total exposure time of 320 µs. Table 5.2 showcases
the laser parameters utilised in the 1040 nm experiment, and a different beam area is
observed, as a higher wavelength resulted in a larger diffraction-limited beam diameter.
Therefore, higher average powers were required to match the 800 nm fluence. Cell via-
bility statistics are shown in Table 6.3 for each fluence level, with the cell viability heatmap
and point plots supplied in Figure 6.7 and 6.8, respectively.
The results show very consistent cell viability when comparing medians, with no sudden
drop. This is very different when comparing to equivalent fluence levels used with an 800
nm wavelength, where a substantial drop in cell viability was observed when irradiating
with a fluence level of 5.30×107 (C2). However, this drop in cell viability was absent
when cells were irradiated with an approximately equivalent fluence level of 5.19×107
(E3). This suggests that factors outside laser fluence affect cell viability, and that these
effects depend on the laser wavelength.
Figure 6.9 displays the live/dead fluorescence images that represent the median cell vi-
ability for each sample other than the control. The images clearly show fewer dead cells
at the equivalent fluence values used in the 800 nm experiment (Figure 6.6), which again
prompts discussion of the use of different wavelengths in cell damage studies. Live/dead
fluorescence images for each replicate in this experiment are presented in Appendix G.1
and G.2, showing a consistent cell viability with increasing fluence.
Figure 6.7: Cell viability heatmap as a function of fluence for each replicate at 1040 nm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.8: Individual and mean cell viabilities with error bars as a function of fluence at 1040 nm.
The inset highlights non-control points.
(a) A3 Rep 2, CV = 98.9%
(b) B3 Rep 2, CV = 98.9%
(c) C3 Rep 3, CV = 97.5%
(d) D3 Rep 1, CV = 98.6%
(e) E3 Rep 2, CV = 98.4%
(f) F3 Rep 1, CV = 97.2%
Figure 6.9: Overview of median live/dead fluorescence results across experimental conditions
using a 1040 nm wavelength (A3-F3). Scale bars are 50 µm.
50
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Impact of Pixel Dwell Time and Number of Scans on Cell
Viability at 800 nm
In the following experiments, the pixel dwell time is defined as the duration the laser re-
mains on a single pixel. The number of scans describes how many times the system
acquires a full frame, showing how often the beam completes a spatial scan of the sam-
ple plane. Both the irradiation and imaging parts of each experiment were implemented
at a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels. Overall, the product of the number of scans and the
pixel dwell time determines the total exposure time applied to the sample.
6.3.1
Experiment with three constant fluence pairwise wells between
different exposure time combinations (dwell /scan repetition) at
9.57 × 1010 W/m2 average irradiance
In this part, the effect of fluence was evaluated under constant irradiance conditions, us-
ing samples irradiated at an average irradiance of 9.57 × 1010 W/m2. This value was
selected to remain below the previously determined viability threshold. Each sample was
irradiated under different combinations of pixel dwell times and number of scans, result-
ing in variations in total fluence according to the cumulative exposure time, as is shown in
Table 6.4. Three pairs of conditions shared the same total irradiation time, while differing
in their dwell and frame number combinations. The same control reference was used
for all samples, as they were obtained from cultures with identical passage numbers and
experimental conditions.
Overall, cell viability remained high across all conditions, with no significant differences ob-
served between irradiated samples and the mean control (see Table 6.5 and Figure 6.10).
The sample corresponding to a fluence of (4.59 × 107 J/m2) showed a moderate 2.015
± 0.351% decrease in viability compared to the control mean (98.509 ± 0.128 %) when
pixel dwell time was higher at 32 µs and the number of scans was lower at 15 amount of
scans at the focal plane of the sample. At the same fluence, the sample with 100 scans
at the exposure time has the least difference from the control mean at 0.446 ± 0.616 %.
This remarkable change between the two values probably came from the small sample
size and the great standard error of the mean.
Table 6.4: Viability statistical results for various wells of different conditions.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan
rate)
Controls (%)
Median (%) SD (%)
Fluence
(J/m2)
32µs × 5 (A4)
98.961
97.578
1.235
1.53 × 107
1.6µs × 100 (D4)
99.015
96.615
0.918
1.53 × 107
32µs × 15 (B4)
97.716
96.037
0.942
4.59 × 107
4.8µs × 100 (E4)
99.364
98.913
1.848
4.59 × 107
32µs × 30 (C4)
98.554
96.923
0.271
9.19 × 107
9.6µs × 100 (F4)
97.447
96.347
0.918
9.19 × 107
Mean Control
98.509 ± 0.314
0.768
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
51
==PAGE:58==
Table 6.5: Mean Viability of Irradiated Areas and Difference of Mean/Control-Irradiated for each
exposure condition.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan rate)
Mean Viability of
Irradiated Areas
(±SEM %)
Difference of Mean/
Control-Irradiated
(±SEM %)
32µs × 5 (A4)
97.354 ± 0.713
1.155 ± 0.779
1.6µs × 100 (D4)
97.136 ± 0.544
1.373 ± 0.628
32µs × 15 (B4)
96.494 ± 0.157
2.015 ± 0.351
4.8µs × 100 (E4)
98.063 ± 0.530
0.446 ± 0.616
32µs × 30 (C4)
96.844 ± 1.067
1.665 ± 1.112
9.6µs × 100 (F4)
96.681 ± 0.530
1.829 ± 0.616
For the other two pairs, the differences in viability were minimal. At the lower fluence of
(1.53 × 107 J/m2), the differences in viability from the control mean were 1.115 ± 0.779 %
and 1.373 ± 0.628 % at the sample with high dwell pixel time (32 µs) and high repetition
of 100 scans, respectively. At the higher value of fluence (9.19 × 107 J/m2), the same
differences in viability have the district values of 1.665 ± 1.112 % and 1.829 ± 0.616 %.
So, the relatively large standard deviations across replicates suggest that variability may
be influencing the fluctuations in the results.
Fluorescence microscopy images (Fig-
ure 6.11) confirmed these findings, showing primarily viable (green) cells with only scat-
tered red-stained (dead) cells, expressive limited photodamage.
In summary, under constant irradiance, variations in fluence within this range had minimal
impact on cell viability, with measured viability ranging from 96.494% to 98.063%. This
suggests that the fluence values was likely to fall below the viability threshold identified in
previous experiments. No consistent relationship was detected between pixel dwell time
and number of scans under these conditions.
Fluence (J/m2); 1,531E+07
Fluence (J/m2); 4,593E+07
Fluence (J/m2); 9,186E+07
0,0E+00
1,0E+07
2,0E+07
3,0E+07
4,0E+07
5,0E+07
6,0E+07
7,0E+07
8,0E+07
9,0E+07
1,0E+08
93,0
94,0
95,0
96,0
97,0
98,0
99,0
100,0
101,0
A 4
D4
B4
E4
C4
F4
Fluence (J/m2)
Viabilty %
Mean Control
Fluence (J/m2)
32µs - 5fr
1.6µs - 100fr
32µs - 15fr
4.8µs - 100fr
32µs - 30fr
9.6µs - 100fr
Figure 6.10: Bar graph showing cell viability and fluence relationships under constant irradiance.
The grey bars indicate cell death, while the other bars indicate live cells.
52
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:59==
Number of scans
Fluence (J/m2)
32 μs Dwell pixel exposure time x scan repetition
4.59 107
9.19 107
1.53 107
(a)
Dwell pixel exposure time (μs)
Fluence (J/m2)
100 number of scans x Dwell pixel exposure time
4.59 107
9.19 107
1.53 107
(b)
Figure 6.11: (a) and (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of LIVE/DEAD cell viability percentage.
Scale bars are 50 μm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
53
==PAGE:60==
6.3.2
Experiment with three constant fluence pairwise wells between
different exposure time combinations (dwell /scan repetition) at
1.42 × 1011 W/m2 average irradiance
The experiment was then repeated under the same irradiation configurations as the pre-
vious one, but with a constant average irradiance of 1.42 × 1011 W/m2, corresponding to
the previously identified irradiance threshold for cell viability at 800 nm wavelength.
Table 6.6: Viability statistical results for various wells of different conditions with a constant irradi-
ance of 1.42 × 1011 W m−2.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan
rate)
(Controls%)
Median (%)
SD (%)
Fluence (%)
(J/m2)
32µs × 5 (A5)
99.476
97.800
1.686
2.27 × 107
1.6µs × 100 (D5)
98.567
97.050
1.392
2.27 × 107
32µs × 15 (B5)
98.918
89.603
1.070
6.82 × 107
4.8µs × 100 (E5)
99.271
94.792
0.768
6.82 × 107
32µs × 30 (C5)
98.806
87.558
2.798
1.36 × 108
9.6µs × 100 (E5)
99.480
92.110
1.660
1.36 × 108
Mean Control
99.086 ± 0.155
0.379
Table 6.7: Mean Viability of Irradiated Areas and Difference of Mean/Control-Irradiated for each
exposure condition at 1.42 × 1011 W/m2.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan rate)
Mean Viability of
Irradiated Areas
(±SEM %)
Difference of Mean/
Control-Irradiated
(±SEM %)
32µs × 5 (A5)
96.848 ± 0.973
2.239 ± 0.985
1.6µs × 100 (D5)
97.561 ± 0.803
1.525 ± 0.818
32µs × 15 (B5)
89.542 ± 0.618
9.545 ± 0.637
4.8µs × 100 (E5)
95.197 ± 0.444
3.890 ± 0.470
32µs × 30 (C5)
86.698 ± 1.615
12.388 ± 1.623
9.6µs × 100 (F5)
92.749 ± 0.959
6.337 ± 0.971
In this experiment, cell viability variation is estimated to be more significant than in the
previous condition with lower irradiance. As shown in Tables 6.6 and 6.7, the viability of
irradiated samples ranged from 86.698 ± 1.615% at the sample with high dwell pixel time
and the highest scan repetition pair (32µs / 30 scans) to 97.561 ± 0.803% at the sample
with the lowest dwell time and high number of scans (1.6µs / 100 scans). The mean of
six control values was 99.086 ± 0.155%. The lowest viability was observed in the sample
with an exposure time of 960 µs, showing a reduction of 12.388 ± 1.623% compared to
the control mean. In contrast, the highest viability was documented for the sample with an
exposure time of 160 µs (1.6 µs / 100 scans), which combined a shorter pixel dwell time
with a higher number of scans at the focal surface and represents a decrease of 1.525 ±
0.818% from the control mean.
54
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:61==
Fluence(J/m2); 2,270E+07
Fluence(J/m2); 6,809E+07
Fluence(J/m2); 1,362E+08
0,0E+00
2,0E+07
4,0E+07
6,0E+07
8,0E+07
1,0E+08
1,2E+08
1,4E+08
1,6E+08
75,0
80,0
85,0
90,0
95,0
100,0
105,0
A5
D5
B5
E5
C5
F5
Fluence (J/m2)
Viability %
Controls
Fluence(J/m2)
32µs-5fr
1.6µs-100fr
32µs-15fr
4.8µs-100fr
32µs-30fr
9.6µs-100fr
Figure 6.12: Bar graph showing cell viability and fluence relationships under constant irradiance
at 1.42 × 1011 W/m2. The grey bars indicate cell death, while the other bars indicate live cells.
When comparing pairs of samples with identical fluence and mean irradiance (Figure 6.12),
a consistent trend arises. Samples exposed to longer dwell times per pixel—and therefore
a higher energy deposition per point—exhibited lower viability than those exposed to mul-
tiple scans with shorter dwell times. More specifically, at a fluence of 2.27 × 107 J/m2, the
difference in viability between paired samples was small (0.713 ± 1.262%), but this differ-
ence became more significant at higher fluences (6.82 × 107 J/m2 and 1.36 × 108 J/m2),
reaching 5.655 ± 0.761% and 6.051 ± 1.878%, respectively.
Despite the variability between replicates, the overall pattern indicates that higher flu-
ence values are associated with lower viability percentages, even when mean irradiance
remains constant. This is supported by fluorescence microscopy images (Figure 6.13),
in which conditions corresponding to higher fluence represent a greater number of red
(dead) cells relative to viable (green) cells.
Ultimately, these findings suggest that at an irradiance of 1.42 × 1011 W/m2, cells ap-
proach a damage threshold at which fluence becomes a measurable factor affecting vi-
ability. Under these conditions, cell damage is primarily determined by the energy de-
posited per pixel (dwell time) rather than by the total number of scans at the focal plane,
highlighting the significance of localized photon density.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
55
==PAGE:62==
Number of scans
Fluence (J/m2)
32 μs Dwell pixel exposure time x scan repetition
6.81 107
1.36 108
2.27 107
Viability %
(a)
Dwell pixel exposure time (μs)
Fluence (J/m2)
100 number of scans x Dwell pixel exposure time
6.81 107
1.36 108
2.27 107
Viability %
(b)
Figure 6.13:
(a) and (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of LIVE/DEAD cell viability per-
centage as a comparison of sample pairs with identical fluence and mean irradiance under
1.42 × 1011 W/m2. Scale bars are 50μm.
56
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:63==
6.4
Experiment of three different constant fluence wells at
different average irradiance
To evaluate the effect of irradiance on cell viability while maintaining a constant fluence,
cells were exposed to three different average irradiance values: 3.55 × 1010 W/m2,
1.42 × 1011 W/m2, and 2.36 × 1011 W/m2.
The total fluence was kept constant at
4.54 × 107 J/m2, and the exposure time was identical for all samples. Despite this, cell vi-
ability varied significantly with irradiance fluctuation, as represented in Tables 6.8 and 6.9.
Table 6.8: Viability statistical results for various wells of different conditions under constant fluence
and varying irradiance.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan
rate)
Controls (%)
Median (%)
SD (%)
Irradiance
(W/m2)
32µs × 6 (A6)
99.630
73.567
10.076
2.36 × 1011
32µs × 10 (B6)
99.157
91.040
2.395
1.42 × 1011
32µs × 40 (C6)
99.377
99.733
0.354
3.55 × 1010
Mean Control
99.388 ± 0.136
0.236
Table 6.9: Mean Viability of Irradiated Areas and Difference of Mean/Control-Irradiated for each
irradiance level under constant fluence.
Exposure
Time
(Dwell pixel
time × Scan rate)
Mean Viability of
Irradiated Areas
(±SEM %)
Difference of Mean/
Control-Irradiated
(±SEM %)
32µs × 6 (A6)
75.791 ± 5.817
23.597 ± 1.272
32µs × 10 (B6)
91.455 ± 1.383
7.933 ± 1.045
32µs × 40 (C6)
99.534 ± 0.204
-0.146 ± 0.805
To minimise the influence of other parameters, the pixel dwell time during irradiation was
maintained constant, as this factor was previously identified as having a strong impact on
the cellular response. The reasons for this will be detailed in the Discussion section 7.5.
Therefore, the variations among samples resulted exclusively from differences in scan
repetition across the focal plane.
Figure 6.14 illustrates a bar plot that at the highest irradiance 2.36 × 1011 W/m2, a sig-
nificant reduction in viability was observed, with mean viability decreasing to 75.791 ±
5.817%, corresponding to a difference of 23.597 ± 1.272% compared to the non-irradiated
control mean (99.388 ± 0.136%). Although the relatively high standard deviation may have
influenced this result, the downward trend remains evident.
At the intermediate irradiance 1.42 × 1011 W/m2, a moderate decrease in viability was
detected (91.455 ± 1.383%), with a mean control variation of 7.933 ± 1.045%. At the
lowest irradiance 3.55 × 1010 W/m2, viability remained comparable to the control mean
(99.534 ± 0.204%), yielding a slight negative difference of -0.146 ± 0.805%.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
57
==PAGE:64==
2,36E+11
1,42E+11
3,55E+10
0,0E+00
5,0E+10
1,0E+11
1,5E+11
2,0E+11
2,5E+11
0,0
20,0
40,0
60,0
80,0
100,0
120,0
A6
B6
C6
Irradiance (W/m2)
Viability %
Mean Control
Irradiance (W/m2)
32us - 6fr
32us - 10fr
32us - 40fr
Figure 6.14: Bar graph showing cell viability under constant fluence for different irradiance levels.
Irradiance (W/m2)
Exposure Time (μs)—32 μsec Dwell pixel exposure time x scan repetition
2,36E+11
1,42E+11
3,55E+10
Scan Rate
Viability %
Figure 6.15: Comparison of cell viability trends under different irradiance levels at constant flu-
ence. Scale bars are 50μm.
58
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:65==
This higher value than the control mean likely arises from the reduced sample size (three
irradiated and one control area) and the methodological approach for live/dead cell ratio
quantification (see Chapter 5). The difference is, however, negligible and considered
statistically insignificant.
These results provide that, under constant fluence, cell viability is inversely correlated
with irradiance, indicating that higher power densities can induce greater cellular stress
and photodamage despite equivalent total energy deposition. Two-photon fluorescence
microscopy images (Figure 6.15) validate these quantitative findings. Samples irradiated
at higher irradiances exhibit a greater proportion of red (dead) cells, whereas those ex-
posed to lower irradiances display predominantly green fluorescence, corresponding to
viable cells.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
59
==PAGE:66==
60
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:67==
7
Discussion
The thesis aimed to evaluate the effects of multiphoton laser irradiation on mammalian cell
viability. This was achieved by studying various laser parameters and their effects on cell
viability. Despite the relatively small sample size, the experimental results are consistent
and provide important information on the mechanisms of laser-induced cell damage in
HT-29 cell cultures.
7.1
Experimental variability and sample size
The main limitation of this study was the small number of replicates in each experimental
condition. A larger dataset would have increased the statistical reliability and power of the
current trends. For this purpose, the analysis of the samples was primarily supervised us-
ing the G*Power program, which helped standardise the evaluation procedure and justify
the methodological approach in the present work. Despite the limited sampling, the re-
sults remained consistent and in good agreement with theoretical expectations. Although
the data are insufficient for statistical analysis, the overall patterns support the working
hypothesis that both irradiance and fluence are critical factors in determining cell damage
thresholds (Chapter 5.4, and Appendices M, N, O and P).
7.2
Influence of cell confluence on cell imaging and counting
Cell confluence was identified as a factor that significantly affected both irradiation and
image analysis. In wells above approximately 80% confluence, it was difficult to detect the
correct focal plane during both laser exposure and fluorescence imaging. This difficulty
may arise from the increased light scattering within thicker cell layers, which complicates
the identification of the same regions before and after irradiation. Figure 7.1 showcases
two samples with different conflucence levels for reference. It was especially challenging
during the experiment, which examined the effect of pixel dwell time and number of scans
on cell viability at 800 nm (see Figures 6.11 and 6.13 in Section 6.3).
Figure 7.1: Difference in confluence. (Left image) Sample with moderate confluence. (Right
image) Sample with high confluence. Scale bar at 50μm.
These challenges affected multiple stages of the protocol, from irradiation and imaging to
subsequent image processing, leading to non-uniform intensity distributions and difficul-
ties in reliably identifying distinct cells using the watershed algorithm in FIJI. In contrast,
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
61
==PAGE:68==
wells with lower confluence levels (approximately 60–70%) provided better focus stability,
more homogeneous intensity distribution, and more reproducible live/dead segmentation.
Overall, these observations indicate that moderate confluence is optimal for gaining con-
sistent and accurate threshold estimation in laser damage studies.
7.3
Influence on viability ratio from watershed segmentation
and other protocol limitations
In the current analysis, the default basin-based watershed segmentation algorithm of FIJI
(ImageJ) was used for object detection. This approach is widely used for image analysis
following fluorescence microscopy. However, it is sensitive to noise, irregular cell bound-
aries, and intensity differences. Consequently, even after the pre-processing correction
of the image intensity distribution, the segmentation sometimes produced asymmetric re-
gions, leading to incorrect separation or merging of objects. Therefore, this incorrect sep-
aration is misleading and contributes to variability in cell counting results. This variability
was further amplified by manual adjustments of brightness and contrast, which introduce
additional uncertainty and reduce the reproducibility of the analysis.
A further limitation encountered during image analysis relates to the morphology of the
cells and the optical system. In several cases, during the composition of the final images,
live/dead fluorescence measurements showed partial overlap between the two wave-
length channels. This overlap may arise from scattering within the sample, which can
cause a signal generating from live cells to appear in the wavelength region associated
with dead cell fluorescence at the channel capturing dead cells. Additionally, multilayered
or clustered cellular arrangements may project fluorophores from different focal depths
onto the same two-dimensional area. In case of scattering, the quantification algorithm
may accidentally count the same cell twice, increasing the number of dead cells and af-
fecting the calculated viability ratio.
Beyond these optical and analytical limitations, aspects of the experimental protocol also
contribute to variability in results. The use of a water-immersion objective in the two-
photon microscope imposes restrictions on irradiation and imaging due to potential col-
lisions with the well edges. It also affects the PBS-washing steps during the irradiation
process. The image in Figure 7.2 shows that the cells can therefore establish mechanical
and osmotic stress on cell cultures, even if at the protocol the PBS is replaced shortly be-
fore irradiation and then exchanged with culture medium between irradiation and imaging
(Figure 5.4).
Cells exposed to PBS for extended periods often exhibit reduced adherence, rounding,
and partial detachment due to a lack of nutrients or serum components. Such weakly
adherent or detached cells are more easily displaced during washing or imaging, modi-
fying cell density and influencing the ratio of live to dead signals. Therefore, part of the
observed variability in cell counts may reflect stress caused by sample handling rather
than irradiation-induced effects.
62
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:69==
Figure 7.2: The influence of PBS after a couple of hours in a control sample. Scale bar at 50μm.
7.4
Wavelength dependence of cell viability
The results demonstrate a strong wavelength dependence in the cellular response to irra-
diation. As shown in Figure 6.4, exposure at 800 nm resulted in a noticeable reduction in
cell viability at high laser powers, decreasing to approximately 33% at the highest fluence
condition of 7.57 × 107 J/m2 and mean irradiance of 2.36 × 1011 W/m2. In contrast, 1040
nm irradiation (see Figure 6.7) yielded significantly higher viability, remaining at approxi-
mately 91% under comparable fluence levels, with a mean irradiance of 1.89 × 1011 W/m2
and fluence of 6.04 × 107 J/m2, at the same exposure time but with a larger beam area.
The number of multiphoton absorption events can explain this difference in results be-
tween different wavelengths. At 800 nm, the higher photon energy potentially enhances
photochemical effects by exciting the absorbers to higher electronic states, thereby in-
creasing cellular damage. It can be declared that photothermal effects have a minimal
impact on cell viability, as 1040 nm has a higher absorption coefficient than 800 nm, but
results in higher cell viability.
7.5
Influence on cell viability from fluence, irradiance, and
dwell time
The results of the irradiated samples under different fluence conditions indicate that both
fluence and average irradiance significantly influence the amount of cell damage. At 800
nm, the damage threshold appears near a mean irradiance value of 1.42 × 1011 W/m2
and fluence at 4.54 × 107 J/m2, leading to an approximate cell viability of 80% (see Figure
6.4 and Table 6.2). Above the noted values, cell viability decreased substantially.
Although fluence determines the total energy delivered per unit area over time, additional
experiments were performed under constant fluence with different exposure time condi-
tions, but also at varying irradiance values—both above and below the previously identi-
fied threshold. The results suggest that the pixel dwell time and the average irradiance
are also critical parameters. Longer dwell times increase local thermal accumulation at
the focal point, potentially enhancing photothermal damage even when the total fluence
remains constant.
Overall, the radiation received by each pixel (dwell time) and the time between irradiations
of the same area (number of scans), in addition to the total fluence, are critical factors of
cell viability in a scanning real-time two-photon microscope. An interesting trend was no-
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
63
==PAGE:70==
ticed. Higher numbers of scans and shorter dwell times resulted in higher cell viability
compared to lower numbers of scans and longer dwell times at equivalent fluence levels.
This effect likely arises because, at higher scan repetitions, each point on the sample
has more time to relax from the heat between the scans, preventing excessive local en-
ergy buildup. To the contrary, fewer scans with longer dwell times concentrate energy in
smaller regions, minimising the opportunity for thermal relaxation and leading to greater
cumulative damage.
7.6
Thermal relaxation and bubble formation
At high fluence levels, noticeable areas of cellular ablation and micro-scale bubble forma-
tion were observed (see Figure 7.4), particularly in samples exposed to longer pixel dwell
times. These phenomena are most likely associated with thermal relaxation and optical
breakdown effects, as well as is also possible that early plasma formation contributes to
these effects under high fluence conditions. Specifically, when the rate of laser energy
deposition exceeds that of heat diffusion, rapid vaporisation of the surrounding medium
can occur, producing transient microbubbles. The formation of these bubbles generates
localised mechanical stress, which may further contribute to cellular damage [55].
This effect was more pronounced in samples irradiated with higher dwell times, where
a greater number of microbubbles were detected, as illustrated in Figures 7.3 and 7.4.
Interestingly, most bubbles appeared within the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) layer
(Figure 7.3), and in cases where microbubbles were located near the cell layer, the cells
were displaced around the bubble rather than within it. This observation suggests that
the bubbles likely originated from the rapid heating and vaporisation of the liquid medium
rather than direct intracellular ablation. The peak intensity in the conditions shown in Fig-
ure 7.3 reaches approximately 1.77 TW/cm², which falls within the range for non-linear
multi-photon processes leading to optical breakdown, described by König et al. [7]. There-
fore, local plasma formation is possible to occur under these irradiation conditions and
may contribute to the observed photodamage mechanisms.
An additional observation can be made from Figure 7.5, which corresponds to irradia-
tion at approximately half of the fluence compared to Figure 7.3 (4.54 × 107 J/m2 versus
6.81 × 107 J/m2, respectively) but at higher irradiance. Under these conditions, the bub-
bles that appear are smaller and tend to disappear more rapidly after irradiation.
This behaviour shows a trend that at a reduced fluence, the local heating is lessened to
sustain vapor bubbles, allowing them to collapse faster. These observations underline
the relationship between thermal accumulation, energy density, and the cavitation effects
in the surrounding medium. So, it remains unclear whether these cavitation events are
directly associated with reduced cell viability or are products of the high fluence and local
overheating.
64
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:71==
a
b
c
d
e
f
Figure 7.3: NIR camera frames at different timelines (0, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9 minutes respectively with
a,b,c,d,e,f) of a video in a well-plate area of a sample after irradiation with conditions: 32 μsec
dwell pixel time and 15 number of scans at 6.81 × 107 J/m2 fluence and average irradiance of
1.42 × 1011 W/m21.42 × 1011 W/m2.Scale bar of 50μm.
Figure 7.4: NIR camera frames immediately after the irradiation in a well-plate area of a sample
with conditions: 9.6 μsec dwell pixel time and 100 number of scans at 1.36 × 108 J/m2 fluence
and average irradiance of 1.42 × 1011 W/m2 — areas of cellular ablation are sketched at the figure
with red arrows. Scale bar of 50μm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
65
==PAGE:72==
a
b
c
d
Figure 7.5: NIR camera frames at different timelines (0, 30, 60, 90 seconds respectively with
a,b,c,d) of a video in a well-plate area of a sample after irradiation with conditions: 32 μsec
dwell pixel time and 6 repetition scans at 4.54 × 107 J/m2 fluence and average irradiance of
2.36 × 1011 W/m2.Scale bar of 50μm.
7.7
Scanning parameters and flyback considerations
The number of scans (frames) and the pixel dwell time directly control the cumulative
dose delivered to each region. In a two-photon scanning microscope, as the one that
is used in that project, flyback is a term to define the quick, without-imaging movement
of the laser beam back to its starting position after completing a line or frame. During
this period, the laser is turned off (blanked) to prevent incorrect exposure. This additional
unmeasured factor may influence effective exposure by changing the duty cycle of the
scanning mirrors. In this report, the irradiation and imaging processes occurred without
bidirectional scanning, meaning that no flyback-related exposure occurred.
Differences in flyback behaviour could lead to variations in energy delivery, potentially ex-
plaining small fluctuations observed in cell viability among samples. Future experiments
should include calibration of flyback timing to fully quantify its contribution to total expo-
sure.
66
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:73==
7.8
Optical misalignment and imaging artifacts
Another observation comes from a systematic misalignment between the near-infrared
(NIR) and fluorescence imaging channels. The NIR images appeared flipped along the
horizontal axis and displaced upward relative to the corresponding fluorescence images.
Additionally, slight rotational shifts were detected between these images due to stage
movement. The two image types also differed slightly in scale, with the NIR images ap-
pearing slightly larger.
An example of this displacement is illustrated in Figure 7.6, where the fluorescence signal
appears shifted upward and to the right relative to the NIR image reference, with both
translated to a 1024px × 1024px resolution. This misalignment may have appeared from
mechanical offset or beam path deviation between the NIR and PMT beam paths. Such
displacement complicates post-irradiation analysis by making it difficult to precisely match
the same regions before and after exposure.
The same issue also affected focal plane detection, as the NIR and fluorescence images
detected a slight axial shift. To address this, a calibration routine was implemented, in-
volving repeated imaging of multiple samples to determine an average correction factor
to reach the focal plane between the NIR camera and the fluorescence detector. This
calibration improved consistency but introduced a significant uncertainty that could be
minimised further in future experiments through mechanical realignment.
Figure 7.6: Misalignment between NIR (shading) and fluorescence (background) imaging chan-
nels, illustrating displacement, flipping, and rotational offset. Scale bar of 50μm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
67
==PAGE:74==
7.9
Comparison of this work to literature
This work found irradiance and fluence values that resulted in either survival or death of
HT-29 cells. In section 4, a literature review was conducted that included fluence and
irradiance thresholds. Figure 7.7 displays the total fluence thresholds from literature as a
function of the wavelength, with data points found in this work.
This work has revealed previously unknown values and the first threshold values for HT-
29 cells. The only other threshold found in 1040 nm was that of HeLa cells, identified by
Talone et al. to be a fluence value that was a magnitude of about 104 higher (27.9 MJ/cm2)
than the total fluence values tested in this work (4.54×107 J/m2 or 4.54×10−3 MJ/cm2)
[26]. This may further indicate that the cells have higher tolerance to the 1040 nm wave-
length. Additionally, Talone et al. use a non-scanning microscope, which introduces an
additional variable compared to this work.
As previously mentioned in this work, the fluence threshold was found to be 4.54×107 J/m2
at 800 nm. Figure 7.7 showcases that this threshold is close to other thresholds that in-
duced damage mechanisms in different samples. Furthermore, the fluence threshold was
higher than that for CHO cells at 760 nm, suggesting that HT-29 cells are more resilient.
However, this could also support the results obtained between 800 nm and 1040 nm in
this work, where the thresholds are wavelength-dependent. As no literature was found in-
vestigating cell viability at 800 nm, it cannot be determined whether the damage threshold
is directly dependent on cell type.
Figure 7.8 shows fluence as a function of irradiance, with literature data points and re-
sults from this work. The results show that HT-29 cells do not suffer damage from very
high irradiances or fluences when exposed to a 1040 nm laser. This may suggest that
a systematic error occurred during the experiment or that interpolated power values are
inaccurate. However, it may also indicate that the wavelength has a very high effect, as
previously mentioned. The theory of wavelength dependence on cell viability requires
more investigation to determine if this is the case.
68
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:75==
(a) Fluence values as a function of wavelength, showcased by damage type investigated.
(b) Fluence values as a function of wavelength, showcased by sample type.
Figure 7.7: Plot of fluence as a function of irradiance with data points found in the literature review
and in this work.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
69
==PAGE:76==
(a) Fluence values as a function of irradiance, showcased by damage type investigated.
(b) Fluence values as a function of irradiance, showcased by sample type.
Figure 7.8: Plot of fluence as a function of irradiance with data points found in the literature review
and in this work.
70
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:77==
8
Conclusion
This thesis established and validated a protocol for conducting a mammalian cell study
and quantifying cell viability using a LIVE/DEAD™viability assay. The protocol effectively
minimised stress-induced cell death unrelated to irradiation, as confirmed by the control
values. While developed for HT-29 cells, the protocol can be expanded to include addi-
tional mammalian cell types and explore additional laser parameters, supporting stronger
standardisation in laser-induced cell damage research.
The laser-induced cell damage demonstrated that cell viability decreased with increasing
total fluence as the average power varied, with a potential threshold at 4.54×107 J/m2,
corresponding to a median viability at 87.8%. At the highest fluence tested (7.57×107 J/m2,
irradiance of 2.36×1011 W/m2), median viability dropped to 43.4%. Cell viability showed
a wavelength dependence under similar fluence and irradiance, with 1040 nm yielding
considerably higher median viability than 800 nm, with 97.2% versus 70.1% at the high-
est fluence tested.
Experiments further revealed that cell survival under constant-average irradiance and
constant total fluence conditions depended on the pixel dwell time rather than the num-
ber of scans. The energy deposition per scan negatively affected cell viability once the
irradiance and fluence exceeded threshold values. Additionally, irradiance was found to
adversely affect cell viability under constant total fluence conditions, indicating that ir-
radiance makes a more substantial contribution to laser-induced cell damage than total
fluence.
Nevertheless, the study recognises the limitations of the small sample size used in the
experiments, which posed a challenge to establishing statistical significance. To address
this, statistical power analyses indicated that a larger sample size would be needed to
yield more robust results.
In summary, this work provides a reproducible protocol for cell viability assessment under
laser exposure. It identifies key parameters that influence cell viability, and has the po-
tential to expand studies to additional cell types, laser parameters, and other cell health
indicators. The work lays the foundation for a more robust establishment of laser param-
eter thresholds, enabling safer optical biomedical imaging and treatment.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
71
==PAGE:78==
72
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:79==
9
Future Perspectives
While this thesis has provided insights into the dependence of laser parameters on HT-29
cell viability, unanswered questions remain that warrant further investigation.
The small number of irradiated samples posed a challenge for demonstrating statistical
significance. This was also evident in the statistical power analysis, which indicated that
larger sample sizes would be needed to achieve high statistical power. Therefore, future
investigations should incorporate a larger sample size, which could also pose logistical
challenges for the current protocol.
It was not possible to adjust the optical components within the MPM system, prevent-
ing investigation of the system’s alignment. Future research with the same MPM system
should include realignment of the system to verify the power output. Furthermore, a power
measurement tool with a higher power limit should be used to verify the average power
output, as this work interpolated the average power beyond 50 mW. Lastly, an indepen-
dent investigation on peak laser parameters should be conducted by modulating pulse
duration to investigate cell damage caused by nonlinear absorption events. For example,
pulse duration can be broadened with the use of dispersive materials [56].
With respect to the protocol, some components could be improved to improve cell viability
accuracy. The image analysis, in its current form, is performed manually and uses the
default watershedding algorithm and segmentation process provided by FIJI/ImageJ. This
process could be more automated using deep learning algorithms, thereby eliminating
the manual tasks and associated human error [57]. Additionally, the experiments were
performed in PBS to mimic in vivo conditions and avoid damage to the water-dipping
objective, but this also stressed the cells due to the absence of nutrients and growth
factors. Therefore, future research may incorporate an objective that is not water dipping
alongside samples immersed in growth medium.
In this work, it was not possible to distinguish between different damage mechanisms
due to logistical limitations. Therefore, future research should aim to define thresholds for
laser-induced damage across different mammalian cell functions and to specify different
cell damage mechanisms in a standardised manner. Future investigations into laser-
induced damage to cellular function could employ fluorescent labels to measure specific
cellular functions. Laser parameters that induce genetic damage are of interest, as this
effect is unwanted in in vivo imaging of healthy cells. For future investigations into NIR-
induced genetic damage, a sensitive γH2AX assay that indicates double-strand breaks in
DNA could serve as a potential indicator, as demonstrated in other laser-induced mam-
malian cell damage studies [58, 59]. The formation of reactive oxygen species has been
presented as a key indicator of cell health throughout this thesis, which, in excess, can be
cytotoxic to the cell [60]. Oxygen radicals and, thereby, oxidative stress can be quantified
by fluorescence microscopy using mitochondria-targeted probes [45, 61]. Similarly, cell
proliferation kinetics and apoptosis induction can be assessed through fluorescent dyes
[45, 62].
Beyond fluorescent-labelled methods, CARS (Coherent anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy)
offers promising opportunities as a label-free method for quantifying lipid peroxidation re-
sulting from oxidative stress [63, 64]. However, CARS requires high peak powers, which
may cause cell damage due to nonlinear absorption processes, so it requires careful im-
plementation.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
73
==PAGE:80==
Photothermal damage can be quantified by measuring local cell temperatures, as the
minimum temperature for protein denaturation is known [28]. This can be done non-
experimentally using Monte Carlo simulations (e.g. MCMatlab), which would yield the
most accurate model of heat transfer in tissue [65]. A method that can be tested ex-
perimentally is the implementation of a thermochromic material—a material that changes
its colour reversibly or permanently with local temperature changes [66]. The materials
have been tested with phantoms and cells, making this a viable method for quantifying
photothermal damage in future research [67, 68].
Expanding investigations into diverse cell types could reveal metabolic differences and
enhance the standardisation of cell damage studies. Ideally, standardised protocols would
further allow the development of theoretical models for each damage mechanism based
on relevant laser parameters. Such models would be a vital tool for predicting thresholds,
leading to safer optical imaging and more effective optics-based treatment in different cell
types.
74
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Takahiro Matsui et al. “Non-labeling multiphoton excitation microscopy as a novel
diagnostic tool for discriminating normal tissue and colorectal cancer lesions”. In:
Scientific Reports 7.1 (Dec. 2017). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 017-
07244-2.
[2]
Ashwathama Dilipkumar et al. “Label-Free Multiphoton Endomicroscopy for Mini-
mally Invasive In Vivo Imaging”. In: Advanced Science 6.8 (Apr. 2019). ISSN: 21983844.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.201801735.
[3]
Fritjof Helmchen and Winfried Denk. Deep tissue two-photon microscopy. 2005.
DOI: 10.1038/nmeth818.
[4]
Shinya Inoué. “Foundations of Confocal Scanned Imaging in Light Microscopy”. In:
Handbook Of Biological Confocal Microscopy. Ed. by James B Pawley. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 2006, pp. 1–19. ISBN: 978-0-387-45524-2. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-
45524-2{\_}1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-45524-2_1.
[5]
Kenneth W Dunn and Pamela A Young. Principles of multiphoton microscopy. Nov.
2006. DOI: 10.1159/000090614.
[6]
K Konig. Multiphoton microscopy in life sciences. 2000. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2818.
2000.00738.x.
[7]
Karsten König. Handbook Of Biological Confocal Microscopy 3rd Edition: Chapter
38 Cell Damage During Multi-Photon Microscopy. Ed. by James B. Pawley. Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2006, pp. 680–689. ISBN: 978-0-387-25921-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-
0-387-45524-2.
[8]
Hoon Chung et al. “The nuts and bolts of low-level laser (Light) therapy”. In: Annals
of Biomedical Engineering 40.2 (Nov. 2012), pp. 516–533. ISSN: 00906964. DOI:
10.1007/s10439-011-0454-7.
[9]
Dr. Rüdiger Paschotta. RP Photonics Encyclopedia. 2025. URL: https://www.rp-
photonics.com/photonics.html.
[10]
Thorlabs. Pulsed Lasers Introduction to Power and Energy Calculations. URL: https:
//www.thorlabs.com/images/tabimages/Laser_Pulses_Power_Energy_Equations.pdf.
[11]
Dr. Rüdiger Paschotta. “Fluence”. In: RP Photonics Encyclopedia (Aug. 2014). DOI:
10.61835/J0U. URL: https://www.rp-photonics.com/fluence.html.
[12]
Dr. Rüdiger Paschotta. “Irradiance”. In: RP Photonics Encyclopedia (Mar. 2019).
DOI: 10.61835/UTJ. URL: https://www.rp-photonics.com/irradiance.html.
[13]
D. C. Browne. “The form and function of the animal cell”. In: Pharmacognosy: Fun-
damentals, Applications, and Strategies, Second Edition. Elsevier, Jan. 2023, pp. 509–
530. ISBN: 9780443186578. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-443-18657-8.00028-1.
[14]
Aymar Abel Ganguin, Simone Aleandri, and Paola Luciani. “The cell: cell microenvi-
ronment and cell handling”. In: Microfluidics for Cellular Applications. Elsevier, Jan.
2023, pp. 5–26. ISBN: 9780128224823. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-822482-3.00002-6.
[15]
Eva Bianconi et al. “An estimation of the number of cells in the human body”. In:
Annals of Human Biology 40.6 (Nov. 2013), pp. 463–471. ISSN: 03014460. DOI:
10.3109/03014460.2013.807878.
[16]
Hany Mostafa. Different cells of the human body: Categories and morphological
characters. Apr. 2022. DOI: 10.4103/jmau.jmau{\_}74{\_}20.
[17]
George E. Billman. Homeostasis: The Underappreciated and Far Too Often Ignored
Central Organizing Principle of Physiology. Mar. 2020. DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.
00200.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
75
==PAGE:82==
[18]
Pablo Oriol Valls and Alessandro Esposito. Signalling dynamics, cell decisions, and
homeostatic control in health and disease. Apr. 2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.ceb.2022.01.
011.
[19]
Xiangduo Kong, Nicole M. Wakida, and Kyoko Yokomori. “Application of Laser Mi-
croirradiation in the Investigations of Cellular Responses to DNA Damage”. In: Fron-
tiers in Physics 8 (Jan. 2021). ISSN: 2296424X. DOI: 10.3389/fphy.2020.597866.
[20]
P. Philippe Laissue et al. Assessing phototoxicity in live fluorescence imaging. June
2017. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.4344.
[21]
Tina Batista Napotnik, Tamara Polajžer, and Damijan Miklavčič. Cell death due to
electroporation – A review. Oct. 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.bioelechem.2021.107871.
[22]
Susan L. Fink and Brad T. Cookson. Apoptosis, pyroptosis, and necrosis: Mecha-
nistic description of dead and dying eukaryotic cells. Apr. 2005. DOI: 10.1128/IAI.
73.4.1907-1916.2005.
[23]
Sikou Shen, Yina Shao, and Chenghua Li. Different types of cell death and their
shift in shaping disease. Dec. 2023. DOI: 10.1038/s41420-023-01581-0.
[24]
Marcus Krüger and Peter Richter. To Die or Not to Die: Cell Death in Biology and
Disease. June 2022. DOI: 10.3390/ijms23126734.
[25]
Karsten Konig. 14 - Cellular Response to Laser Radiation in Fluorescence Micro-
scopes. Tech. rep. 2001.
[26]
B. Talone et al. “Phototoxicity induced in living HeLa cells by focused femtosecond
laser pulses: a data-driven approach”. In: Biomedical Optics Express 12.12 (Dec.
2021), p. 7886. ISSN: 2156-7085. DOI: 10.1364/boe.441225.
[27]
Delphine Débarre et al. “Mitigating phototoxicity during multiphoton microscopy of
live drosophila embryos in the 1.0-1.2 µm wavelength range”. In: PLoS ONE 9.8
(Aug. 2014). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104250.
[28]
G Insero and G Romano. “Laser photo-induced effects: a focus on the photothermal
interaction”. In: Energy for Health (2024).
[29]
Frank Fischer et al. “Assessing the risk of skin damage due to femtosecond laser
irradiation”. In: Journal of Biophotonics 1.6 (2008), pp. 470–477. ISSN: 18640648.
DOI: 10.1002/jbio.200810050.
[30]
Eric M. Strohm, Michael J. Moore, and Michael C. Kolios. Single Cell Photoacoustic
Microscopy: A Review. May 2016. DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2015.2497323.
[31]
Geoffrey M.. Cooper. The cell : a molecular approach. ASM Press ; Sinauer Asso-
ciates, 2000, p. 689. ISBN: 0878931066.
[32]
Richard L Auten and Jonathan M Davis. The Role of Oxygen in Health and Disease-
A Series of Reviews Oxygen Toxicity and Reactive Oxygen Species: The Devil Is
in the Details. Tech. rep. 2009, pp. 121–127.
[33]
Celia Andrés Juan et al. “Molecular Sciences The Chemistry of Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS) Revisited: Outlining Their Role in Biological Macromolecules (DNA,
Lipids and Proteins) and Induced Pathologies”. In: Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2021), p. 4642.
DOI: 10.3390/ijms. URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms.
[34]
Michael P. Murphy et al. “Guidelines for measuring reactive oxygen species and ox-
idative damage in cells and in vivo”. In: Nature Metabolism 4.6 (June 2022), pp. 651–
662. ISSN: 25225812. DOI: 10.1038/s42255-022-00591-z.
[35]
Maria Przygoda et al. Cellular Mechanisms of Singlet Oxygen in Photodynamic
Therapy. Dec. 2023. DOI: 10.3390/ijms242316890.
[36]
Yao Liu and Rong Qin. “Antibacterial photodynamic therapy: overview of a promis-
ing approach to fight antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections”. In: Journal of Clinical
and Translational Research (2015). ISSN: 2424-810X. DOI: 10.18053/jctres.201503.
002.
76
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:83==
[37]
Alessandra Cipriano et al. NADPH Oxidases: From Molecular Mechanisms to Cur-
rent Inhibitors. Sept. 2023. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c00770.
[38]
A. Vogel et al. Mechanisms of femtosecond laser nanosurgery of cells and tissues.
Dec. 2005. DOI: 10.1007/s00340-005-2036-6.
[39]
Steven Rehse and University of Windsor. What is LIBS? | Dr. Steven Rehse. URL:
https://www.uwindsor.ca/people/rehse/299/libs.
[40]
Dr. Rüdiger Paschotta. “Titanium-doped Laser Gain Media”. In: RP Photonics En-
cyclopedia (Oct. 2025). DOI: 10.61835/R42. URL: https://www.rp-photonics.com/
titanium_doped_laser_gain_media.html.
[41]
Karsten Konig et al. Cellular response to near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses in
two-photon microscopes. Tech. rep. 2. 1997.
[42]
Karsten Konig et al. Pulse-length dependence of cellular response to intense near-
infrared laser pulses in multiphoton microscopes. Tech. rep. 2. 1999. DOI: 10.1364/
ol.24.000113.
[43]
H. Oehring et al. “Ultrastructure and reproduction behaviour of single CHO-K1 cells
exposed to near infrared femtosecond laser pulses”. In: Scanning 22.4 (2000),
pp. 263–270. ISSN: 01610457. DOI: 10.1002/sca.4950220406.
[44]
Oleg Nadiarnykh et al. “Carcinogenic damage to deoxyribonucleic acid is induced
by near-infrared laser pulses in multiphoton microscopy via combination of two-
and three-photon absorption”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 17.11 (Nov. 2012),
p. 116024. ISSN: 1083-3668. DOI: 10.1117/1.jbo.17.11.116024.
[45]
Shagufta Rehman Alam et al. “Characterization of mitochondrial dysfunction due
to laser damage by 2-photon FLIM microscopy”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (Dec.
2022). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-15639-z.
[46]
Paromita Majumder et al. “Multiphoton NAD(P)H FLIM reveals metabolic changes
in individual cell types of the intact cochlea upon sensorineural hearing loss”. In:
Scientific Reports 9.1 (Dec. 2019). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 019-
55329-x.
[47]
Xinyi Zhang et al. “Phototoxic effects of nonlinear optical microscopy on cell cy-
cle, oxidative states, and gene expression”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (Dec. 2022).
ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-23054-7.
[48]
Luca Dalbosco et al. “Photodamage in deep tissue two-photon optical biopsy of
human skin”. In: Journal of Biophotonics 8.10 (Oct. 2015), pp. 816–825. ISSN:
18640648. DOI: 10.1002/jbio.201400083.
[49]
International Organization for Standardization (ICNIRP). “Icnirp guidelines on limits
of exposure to laser radiation of wavelengths between 180 nm and 1,000 µm”. In:
Health Physics 105.3 (2013), pp. 271–295. ISSN: 15385159. DOI: 10.1097/HP.
0b013e3182983fd4.
[50]
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). DANSK STANDARD Oftalmol-
ogiske instrumenter-Grundlaeggende krav og prøvningsmetoder-Del 2: Beskyttelse
mod lysfarer. Tech. rep. 2024. URL: www.ds.dk.
[51]
American Type Culture Collection. HT-29 (HTB-38). Tech. rep. Oct. 2025. URL:
www.atcc.org.
[52]
David G. Rosenegger et al. “A high performance, cost-effective, open-source mi-
croscope for scanning two-photon microscopy that is modular and readily adapt-
able”. In: PLoS ONE 9.10 (Oct. 2014). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0110475.
[53]
Thorlabs. Optical Power Meter Kits. URL: https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.
cfm?objectgroup_id=4216.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
77
==PAGE:84==
[54]
Coherent. Chameleon Discovery series offers next-generation automated High-Power,
Widely Tunable Femtosecond Laser Chameleon Discovery NX/LX. Tech. rep. 2024.
[55]
Sung Yong Park and Pei Yu Chiou. Light-driven droplet manipulation technologies
for lab-on-a-chip applications. 2011. DOI: 10.1155/2011/909174.
[56]
Edmund Optics and Olivia Wheeler. Basics of Ultrafast Lasers | Edmund Optics.
2025. URL: https://www.edmundoptics.com/knowledge-center/application-notes/
optics/basics-of-ultrafast-lasers/.
[57]
Elna Owembabazi, Ibe Michael Usman, and Wusa Makena. “Segmentation and
quantification of testicular histology images using machine learning bioimage anal-
ysis tools; Ilastik and Fiji software”. In: MethodsX 15 (Dec. 2025). ISSN: 22150161.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mex.2025.103503.
[58]
Darren J.X. Chow et al. “Quantifying DNA damage following light sheet and confocal
imaging of the mammalian embryo”. In: Scientific Reports 14.1 (Dec. 2024). ISSN:
20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-71443-x.
[59]
Bárbara Alcaraz Silva, Jessica R. Stambaugh, and Michael W. Berns. “Targeting
telomere-containing chromosome ends with a near-infrared femtosecond laser to
study the activation of the DNA damage response and DNA damage repair path-
ways”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 18.9 (Sept. 2013), p. 095003. ISSN: 1083-
3668. DOI: 10.1117/1.jbo.18.9.095003.
[60]
Shenshu Yang and Gaojian Lian. ROS and diseases: role in metabolism and energy
supply. Apr. 2020. DOI: 10.1007/s11010-019-03667-9.
[61]
Kristine M. Robinson et al. “Selective fluorescent imaging of superoxide in vivo
using ethidium-based probes”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 103.41 (Oct. 2006), pp. 15038–15043. ISSN:
00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0601945103.
[62]
Joanna Zolnierowicz et al. “Monitoring cell proliferation in vitro with different cellular
fluorescent dyes”. In: Folia Histochemica et Cytobiologica 51.3 (2013), pp. 193–
200. ISSN: 18975631. DOI: 10.5603/FHC.2013.0027.
[63]
Roberta Galli et al. “Intrinsic indicator of photodamage during label-free multiphoton
microscopy of cells and tissues”. In: PLoS ONE 9.10 (Oct. 2014). ISSN: 19326203.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110295.
[64]
Ali Assi et al. “Characterization of free fatty acids photo-oxidation under UV radi-
ations: A stepwise Raman study”. In: Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 54.1 (Jan.
2023), pp. 24–36. ISSN: 10974555. DOI: 10.1002/jrs.6449.
[65]
Dominik Marti et al. “MCmatlab: an open-source, user-friendly, MATLAB-integrated
three-dimensional Monte Carlo light transport solver with heat diffusion and tissue
damage”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 23.12 (Dec. 2018), p. 1. ISSN: 15602281.
DOI: 10.1117/1.jbo.23.12.121622.
[66]
Feng Fu and L. Hu. “Temperature sensitive colour-changed composites”. In: Ad-
vanced High Strength Natural Fibre Composites in Construction. Elsevier Inc., 2017,
pp. 405–423. ISBN: 9780081004302. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100411-1.00015-7.
[67]
Ayele H. Negussie et al. “Thermochromic phantoms and paint to characterize and
model image-guided thermal ablation and ablation devices: a review”. In: Functional
Composite Materials 5.1 (Jan. 2024). DOI: 10.1186/s42252-023-00050-2.
[68]
Walter N. Harrington et al. “Photoswitchable non-fluorescent thermochromic dye-
nanoparticle hybrid probes”. In: Scientific Reports 6 (Nov. 2016). ISSN: 20452322.
DOI: 10.1038/srep36417.
[69]
Sergey N. Arkhipov, Ilyas Saytashev, and Marcos Dantus. “Intravital Imaging Study
on Photodamage Produced by Femtosecond Near-infrared Laser Pulses in Vivo”.
78
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:85==
In: Photochemistry and Photobiology 92.2 (Mar. 2016), pp. 308–313. ISSN: 17511097.
DOI: 10.1111/php.12572.
[70]
Frank Fischer et al. “Risk estimation of skin damage due to ultrashort pulsed, fo-
cused near-infrared laser irradiation at 800 nm”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics
13.4 (2008), p. 041320. ISSN: 10833668. DOI: 10.1117/1.2960016.
[71]
Johanna M Dela Cruz et al. 0180) Microscopy; (180.4315) Nonlinear microscopy.
Tech. rep. 180. 2010, pp. 144–149.
[72]
U. K. Tirlapur et al. “Femtosecond near-infrared laser pulses elicit generation of
reactive oxygen species in mammalian cells leading to apoptosis-like death”. In:
Experimental Cell Research 263.1 (Feb. 2001), pp. 88–97. ISSN: 00144827. DOI:
10.1006/excr.2000.5082.
[73]
Giju Thomas et al. “Estimating the risk of squamous cell cancer induction in skin
following nonlinear optical imaging”. In: Journal of Biophotonics 7.7 (2014), pp. 492–
505. ISSN: 18640648. DOI: 10.1002/jbio.201200207.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
79
==PAGE:86==
80
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:87==
A
ROS-caused Damage Mechanisms
Figure A.1: Direct effects of excessive ROS formation. Figure taken from Auten et al. [32]
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
81
==PAGE:88==
82
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:89==
B
Literature Review Table
Table B.1: (1/2) Table of studies used for the literature review as well as data points identified in this work. Italicised numbers have been manually calculated
based on the information given in the respective literature. Underlined numbers have been estimated based on statements in the respective literature.
Reference
Wavelength (nm)
Exposure time (s)
Repetition rate (MHz)
Pulse duration (fs)
NA
Beam radius (cm)
Beam area (cm2)
Average power (W)
Peak power (W)
Energy per pulse (J)
Irradiance (MW/cm2)
Peak irradiance (MW/cm2)
Total Fluence (J/cm2)
Per-pulse fluence (J/cm2)
Sample
Outcome
König et al. 1997 [41]
730
0.0008
80
150
1.25
3.56E-05
3.99E-09
0.0021
1.75E+02
2.63E-11
5.27E-01
4.39E+04
4.21E+02
6.58E-03
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1997 [41]
760
0.0008
80
150
1.25
3.71E-05
4.32E-09
0.0021
1.75E+02
2.63E-11
4.86E-01
4.05E+04
3.89E+02
6.07E-03
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1997 [41]
800
0.0008
80
150
1.25
3.90E-05
4.79E-09
0.0021
1.75E+02
2.63E-11
4.39E-01
3.65E+04
3.51E+02
5.48E-03
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1999 [42]
780
3600
80
240
1.3
3.66E-05
4.21E-09
0.0045
2.34E+02
5.63E-11
1.07E+00
5.57E+04
3.85E+09
1.34E-02
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1999 [42]
780
3600
80
240
1.3
3.66E-05
4.21E-09
0.0073
3.80E+02
9.13E-11
1.73E+00
9.03E+04
6.24E+09
2.17E-02
CHO cells
Cell death
König et al. 1999 [42]
780
3600
80
2200
1.3
3.66E-05
4.21E-09
0.0073
4.15E+01
9.13E-11
1.73E+00
9.86E+03
6.24E+09
2.17E-02
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1999 [42]
780
3600
80
2200
1.3
3.66E-05
4.21E-09
0.02
1.14E+02
2.50E-10
4.75E+00
2.70E+04
1.71E+10
5.94E-02
CHO cells
Cell death
König et al. 1999 [42]
920
3600
80
200
1.3
4.32E-05
5.85E-09
0.006
3.75E+02
7.50E-11
1.02E+00
6.41E+04
3.69E+09
1.28E-02
CHO cells
Cell proliferation
König et al. 1999 [42]
920
3600
80
200
1.3
4.32E-05
5.85E-09
0.009
5.63E+02
1.13E-10
1.54E+00
9.61E+04
5.53E+09
1.92E-02
CHO cells
Cell death
Ohering et al. 2000 [43]
780
0.0008
80
170
1.3
3.66E-05
4.21E-09
0.0125
9.19E+02
1.56E-10
2.97E+00
2.18E+05
2.38E+03
3.71E-02
CHO cells
Cell death
Nadiarnykh et al. 2012 [44]
750
0.0003
80
164
0.8
5.72E-05
1.03E-08
0.014
1.07E+03
1.75E-10
1.36E+00
1.04E+05
4.09E+02
1.70E-02
CHO cells
DNA damage
Nadiarnykh et al. 2012 [44]
750
0.0003
80
425
0.8
5.72E-05
1.03E-08
0.014
4.12E+02
1.75E-10
1.36E+00
4.01E+04
4.09E+02
1.70E-02
CHO cells
DNA damage
Nadiarnykh et al. 2012 [44]
711
0.0003
80
164
0.8
5.42E-05
9.23E-09
0.014
1.07E+03
1.75E-10
1.52E+00
1.16E+05
4.55E+02
1.90E-02
CHO cells
DNA damage
Nadiarnykh et al. 2012 [44]
780
0.0003
80
164
0.8
5.95E-05
1.11E-08
0.014
1.07E+03
1.75E-10
1.26E+00
9.60E+04
3.78E+02
1.57E-02
CHO cells
DNA damage
Arkhipov et al. 2016 [69]
800
400
80
19
0.827
5.90E-05
1.09E-08
1.50E-02
9.87E+03
1.88E-10
1.37E+00
9.02E+05
5.49E+08
1.71E-02
Drosophilia embryos
Bubble formation
Arkhipov et al. 2016 [69]
800
400
80
42
0.827
5.90E-05
1.09E-08
1.50E-02
4.46E+03
1.88E-10
1.37E+00
4.08E+05
5.49E+08
1.71E-02
Drosophilia embryos
Bubble formation
Arkhipov et al. 2016 [69]
800
400
80
100
0.827
5.90E-05
1.09E-08
1.50E-02
1.88E+03
1.88E-10
1.37E+00
1.71E+05
5.49E+08
1.71E-02
Drosophilia embryos
Bubble formation
Alam et al. 2022 [45]
740
20
80
150
1.3
3.47E-05
3.79E-09
1.29E-02
1.07E+03
1.61E-10
3.40E+00
2.83E+05
6.80E+07
4.25E-02
HeLa cells
Mitochondrial health
Alam et al. 2022 [45]
740
20
80
150
1.3
3.47E-05
3.79E-09
1.29E-02
1.07E+03
1.61E-10
3.40E+00
2.83E+05
6.80E+07
4.25E-02
HeLa cells
Mitochondrial health
Alam et al. 2022 [45]
740
20
80
150
1.3
3.47E-05
3.79E-09
1.29E-02
1.07E+03
1.61E-10
3.40E+00
2.83E+05
6.80E+07
4.25E-02
HeLa cells
Oxidative stress
Alam et al. 2022 [45]
740
20
80
150
1.3
3.47E-05
3.79E-09
1.92E-02
1.60E+03
2.40E-10
5.07E+00
4.23E+05
1.01E+08
6.34E-02
HeLa cells
Apoptosis
Talone et al. 2021 [26]
1040
240
80
130
0.25
2.54E-04
2.02E-07
1.34E-07
1.28E-02
1.67E-15
6.60E-01
6.35E-02
1.58E+08
8.25E-09
HeLa cells
Cell death
Talone et al. 2021 [26]
1040
120
80
130
0.25
2.54E-04
2.02E-07
1.66E-07
1.60E-02
2.07E-15
8.20E-01
7.88E-02
9.84E+07
1.03E-08
HeLa cells
Cell death
Talone et al. 2021 [26]
1040
30
80
130
0.25
2.54E-04
2.02E-07
1.88E-07
1.81E-02
2.35E-15
9.30E-01
8.94E-02
2.79E+07
1.16E-08
HeLa cells
Cell death
Fischer et al. 2008 [70]
800
320
80
150
1.3
3.75E-05
4.43E-09
6.00E-02
5.00E+03
7.50E-10
1.36E+01
1.13E+06
4.34E+09
1.69E-01
Human skin biopsies
DNA damage
Zhang et al. 2022 [47]
796
2.00E-06
80
120
1.2
4.05E-05
5.14E-09
1.00E-01
1.04E+04
1.25E-09
1.94E+01
2.03E+06
3.89E+01
2.43E-01
Neuro2A cells
Oxidative stress
Cruz et al. 2010 [71]
760
1.60E-02
80
200
0.75
6.18E-05
1.20E-08
5.00E-02
3.13E+03
6.25E-10
4.17E+00
2.60E+05
6.66E+04
5.21E-02
V79 CH lung cells
DNA damage
Dalbosco et al. 2015 [48]
800
0.00104
80
200
1
4.88E-05
7.48E-09
1.00E-02
6.25E+02
1.25E-10
1.34E+00
8.35E+04
1.39E+03
1.67E-02
Human skin biopsies
Oxidative stress
Dalbosco et al. 2015 [48]
800
0.00104
80
200
1
4.88E-05
7.48E-09
2.00E-02
1.25E+03
2.50E-10
2.67E+00
1.67E+05
2.78E+03
3.34E-02
Human skin biopsies
Oxidative stress
Dalbosco et al. 2015 [48]
800
0.0005
80
200
1
4.88E-05
7.48E-09
3.70E-02
2.31E+03
4.63E-10
4.95E+00
3.09E+05
2.47E+03
6.18E-02
Human skin biopsies
Bubble formation
Tirlapur et al. 2001 [72]
800
0.0006
80
170
1.3
3.75E-05
4.43E-09
7.00E-03
5.15E+02
8.75E-11
1.58E+00
1.16E+05
9.49E+02
1.98E-02
PtK2 cells
Oxidative stress
==PAGE:90==
Table B.2: (2/2) Table of studies used for the literature review as well as data points identified in this work. Italicised numbers have been manually calculated
based on the information given in the respective literature. Underlined numbers have been estimated based on statements in the respective literature.
Reference
Wavelength (nm)
Exposure time (s)
Repetition rate (MHz)
Pulse duration (fs)
NA
Beam radius (cm)
Beam area (cm2)
Average power (W)
Peak power (W)
Energy per pulse (J)
Irradiance (MW/cm2)
Peak irradiance (MW/cm2)
Total Fluence (J/cm2)
Per-pulse fluence (J/cm2)
Sample
Outcome
Tirlapur et al. 2001 [72]
800
0.0006
80
170
1.3
3.75E-05
4.43E-09
7.00E-03
5.15E+02
8.75E-11
1.58E+00
1.16E+05
9.49E+02
1.98E-02
PtK2 cells
DNA damage
Galli et al. 2014 [63]
781
5.10E+01
80
1200
0.85
5.60E-05
9.87E-09
5.20E-02
5.42E+02
6.50E-10
5.27E+00
5.49E+04
2.69E+08
6.59E-02
Brain tissue
Oxidative stress
Alcaraz Silva et al. 2013 [59]
800
120
76
200
1.4
3.49E-05
3.82E-09
1.40E-02
9.21E+02
1.84E-10
3.67E+00
2.41E+05
4.40E+08
4.83E-02
PtK2 cells
DNA damage
Thomas et al. 2014 [73]
780
0.00015
80
175
0.8
5.95E-05
1.11E-08
7.00E-03
5.00E+02
8.75E-11
6.30E-01
4.50E+04
9.45E+01
7.87E-03
CHO cells
DNA damage
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
1.48E-02
1.85E+03
1.85E-10
3.51E+00
4.38E+05
1.12E+03
4.38E-02
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
2.29E-02
2.86E+03
2.86E-10
5.41E+00
6.76E+05
1.73E+03
6.76E-02
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
3.08E-02
3.85E+03
3.85E-10
7.29E+00
9.11E+05
2.33E+03
9.11E-02
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
4.05E-02
5.06E+03
5.06E-10
9.57E+00
1.20E+06
3.06E+03
1.20E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
5.00E-02
6.25E+03
6.25E-10
1.18E+01
1.48E+06
3.78E+03
1.48E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
6.00E-02
7.50E+03
7.50E-10
1.42E+01
1.77E+06
4.54E+03
1.77E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell death
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
7.00E-02
8.75E+03
8.75E-10
1.66E+01
2.07E+06
5.30E+03
2.07E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell death
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
8.00E-02
1.00E+04
1.00E-09
1.89E+01
2.36E+06
6.05E+03
2.36E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell death
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
9.00E-02
1.13E+04
1.13E-09
2.13E+01
2.66E+06
6.81E+03
2.66E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell death
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
800
3.20E-04
80
100
1
3.67E-05
4.23E-09
1.00E-01
1.25E+04
1.25E-09
2.36E+01
2.96E+06
7.57E+03
2.96E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell death
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
5.00E-02
6.25E+03
6.25E-10
7.00E+00
8.74E+05
2.24E+03
8.74E-02
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
6.20E-02
7.75E+03
7.75E-10
8.67E+00
1.08E+06
2.78E+03
1.08E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
8.10E-02
1.01E+04
1.01E-09
1.13E+01
1.42E+06
3.63E+03
1.42E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
1.00E-01
1.25E+04
1.25E-09
1.40E+01
1.75E+06
4.48E+03
1.75E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
1.16E-01
1.45E+04
1.45E-09
1.62E+01
2.03E+06
5.19E+03
2.03E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
This work (Gore & Argyriadou)
1040
3.20E-04
80
100
1
4.77E-05
7.15E-09
1.35E-01
1.69E+04
1.69E-09
1.89E+01
2.36E+06
6.04E+03
2.36E-01
HT-29 cells
Cell survival
84
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:91==
C
Power measurements
Table C.1: Measured laser powers at three different time-points and corresponding averaged
power with standard deviation. Em dashes indicate values that could not be measured due to
exceeding the maximum measurable power (50 mW).
Percentage (%)
1400 mW (mW)
1468 mW (mW)
1435 mW (mW)
Average (mW)
Std. Dev. (mW)
1
0.92
0.83
1.12
0.96
0.148
2
0.92
0.83
1.12
0.96
0.148
3
1.46
1.33
1.77
1.52
0.226
4
4.65
4.23
5.60
4.83
0.702
5
14.3
12.9
17.3
14.83
2.25
6
16.5
15.0
19.9
17.13
2.51
7
19.2
17.5
22.8
19.83
2.71
8
22.3
20.3
26.0
22.87
2.89
9
25.3
23.3
28.9
25.83
2.84
10
28.5
26.6
32.0
29.03
2.74
11
30.3
28.4
33.8
30.83
2.74
12
32.0
30.0
35.4
32.47
2.73
13
33.6
31.7
37.0
34.10
2.69
14
35.2
33.5
38.7
35.80
2.65
15
37.0
35.0
40.2
37.40
2.62
16
38.7
36.6
41.8
39.03
2.62
17
40.1
38.1
43.2
40.47
2.57
18
41.6
39.5
44.6
41.90
2.56
19
43.3
41.2
46.1
43.53
2.46
20
44.9
42.7
47.6
45.07
2.45
21
46.0
43.9
48.7
46.20
2.41
22
47.2
45.1
49.9
47.40
2.41
23
48.3
46.3
—
47.30
1.41
24
49.7
47.6
—
48.65
1.48
25
—
48.9
—
48.90
—
26
—
49.8
—
49.80
—
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
85
==PAGE:92==
D
FOV of NIR and PMTs images
measurements
Figure D.1: Calibration image of the NIR camera using a ruler to determine the field of view (FOV).
The calibration ruler has a subdivision of 10 μm. Scale bar of 10μm.
Table D.1: NIR camera ruler measurements used to determine pixel size and field of view (FOV).
Area
Measured length (pixels)
A
270.010
B
274.000
C
264.000
D
268.010
E
270.000
Mean
269.204
Known length
100 μm
Pixel size
0.371 μm/pixel
Sampling Density
2.692 pixel/μm
Calculated FOV (height)
380.400 μm
Calculated FOV (width)
475.500 μm
86
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:93==
Figure D.2: Fluorescent bead measurements used to determine the PMT detection FOV. Scale
bar of 6μm.
Table D.2: PMT bead-measurements used to determine pixel size and field of view (FOV).
Sample
Measured radius (μm)
pixel/μm
μm/pixel
A
9.634
1.606
0.623
B
8.536
1.423
0.703
C
8.772
1.462
0.684
D
10.521
1.754
0.570
Mean (measured)
9.366
1.561
0.645
Known bead radius
6 μm
–
–
Calculated FOV:
Pixel size = 0.645 μm/pixel
512 pixels →330.240 μm
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
87
==PAGE:94==
E
Live/Dead Fluorescence Images -
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell
Viability at 800 nm - First Experiment
Figure E.1: (1/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the experiment using low fluence
values. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.1. Scale bars are 50 µm.
88
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:95==
Figure E.2: (2/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the experiment using low fluence
values. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.1. Scale bars are 50 µm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
89
==PAGE:96==
F
Live/Dead Fluorescence Images -
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell
Viability at 800 nm - Second Experiment
Figure F.1: (1/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the second experiment that used
higher fluence values at 800 nm. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.4. Scale bars are
50 µm.
90
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:97==
Figure F.2: (2/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the second experiment that used
higher fluence values at 800 nm. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.4. Scale bars are
50 µm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
91
==PAGE:98==
G
Live/Dead Fluorescence Images -
Impact of Laser Fluence on Cell
Viability at 1040 nm
Figure G.1: (1/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the experiment investigating flu-
ence values at 1040 nm. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.7. Scale bars are 50 µm.
92
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:99==
Figure G.2: (2/2) Live/dead fluorescence images acquired from the experiment investigating flu-
ence values at 1040 nm. The images are shaped identically to Figure 6.7. Scale bars are 50 µm.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
93
==PAGE:100==
94
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:101==
H
Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiments on Impact
of Fluence on Cell Viability at 800 nm
Table H.1: Raw data of live and dead cell counts, irradiation parameters at 1.42 × 1011 W/m2
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
128
6
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
95.52
A2
124
5
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
96.12
A3
201
2
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
99.01
A4
124
5
32
10
2.27E13
Control
96.12
B1
108
12
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
90.00
B2
131
18
32
10
6.81E13
Control
87.92
B3
188
2
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
98.95
B4
153
2
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
98.71
C1
99
2
32
10
1.36E14
Irradiated
98.02
C2
99
2
32
10
1.36E14
Irradiated
98.02
C3
44
5
32
10
1.36E14
Irradiated
89.80
C4
185
3
32
10
1.36E14
Control
98.40
D1
37
4
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
90.24
D2
54
4
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
93.10
D3
56
3
32
10
2.27E13
Irradiated
94.92
D4
59
2
32
10
2.27E13
Control
96.72
E1
57
5
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
91.94
E2
140
11
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
92.72
E3
82
3
32
10
6.81E13
Irradiated
96.47
E4
66
2
32
10
6.81E13
Control
97.06
F1
59
9
32
10
1.36E14
Irradiated
86.76
F2
38
17
32
10
1.36E14
Irradiated
69.09
F3
55
0
32
10
1.36E14
Control
100.00
F4
NaN
NaN
32
10
1.36E14
NaN
NaN
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
95
==PAGE:102==
Table H.2: Raw data of live and dead cell counts, irradiation parameters at 2.36 × 1011 W/m2
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
292
15
32
10
3.78E+07
Irradiated
95.11
A2
269
2
32
10
3.78E+07
Irradiated
99.26
A3
281
3
32
10
3.78E+07
Irradiated
98.94
A4
246
2
32
10
3.78E+07
Control
99.19
B1
217
30
32
10
4.54E+07
Irradiated
87.85
B2
267
44
32
10
4.54E+07
Irradiated
85.85
B3
250
22
32
10
4.54E+07
Irradiated
91.91
B4
285
3
32
10
4.54E+07
Control
98.96
C1
209
79
32
10
5.30E+07
Irradiated
72.57
C2
141
49
32
10
5.30E+07
Irradiated
74.21
C3
224
57
32
10
5.30E+07
Irradiated
79.72
C4
401
3
32
10
5.30E+07
Control
99.26
D1
102
128
32
10
6.05E+07
Irradiated
44.35
D2
373
84
32
10
6.05E+07
Irradiated
81.62
D3
164
70
32
10
6.05E+07
Irradiated
70.09
D4
286
1
32
10
6.05E+07
Control
99.65
E1
141
113
32
10
6.81E+07
Irradiated
55.51
E2
122
157
32
10
6.81E+07
Irradiated
43.73
E3
139
150
32
10
6.81E+07
Irradiated
48.10
E4
338
0
32
10
6.81E+07
Control
100.00
F1
118
240
32
10
7.57E+07
Irradiated
32.96
F2
147
192
32
10
7.57E+07
Irradiated
43.36
F3
140
170
32
10
7.57E+07
Irradiated
45.16
F4
297
1
32
10
7.57E+07
Control
99.66
96
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:103==
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
97
==PAGE:104==
I
Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiments on Impact
of Fluence on Cell Viability at 1040 nm
Table I.1: Raw data of live and dead cell counts extracted from the investigation on fluence dependence on cell viability at 1040 nm
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
141
1
32
10
2.24E+07
Irradiated
99.30
A2
232
2
32
10
2.24E+07
Control
99.15
A3
182
2
32
10
2.24E+07
Irradiated
98.91
A4
90
1
32
10
2.24E+07
Irradiated
98.90
B1
292
1
32
10
2.77E+07
Irradiated
99.66
B2
183
0
32
10
2.77E+07
Control
100.00
B3
180
2
32
10
2.77E+07
Irradiated
98.90
B4
187
4
32
10
2.77E+07
Irradiated
97.91
C1
287
9
32
10
3.63E+07
Irradiated
96.96
C2
217
1
32
10
3.63E+07
Control
99.54
C3
291
5
32
10
3.63E+07
Irradiated
98.31
C4
235
6
32
10
3.63E+07
Irradiated
97.51
D1
357
5
32
10
4.48E+07
Irradiated
98.62
D2
348
2
32
10
4.48E+07
Irradiated
99.43
D3
254
5
32
10
4.48E+07
Irradiated
98.07
D4
255
2
32
10
4.48E+07
Control
99.22
E1
220
12
32
10
5.19E+07
Irradiated
94.83
E2
484
8
32
10
5.19E+07
Irradiated
98.37
E3
213
3
32
10
5.19E+07
Irradiated
98.61
E4
176
8
32
10
5.19E+07
Control
95.65
F1
211
6
32
10
6.04E+07
Irradiated
97.24
F2
232
1
32
10
6.04E+07
Control
99.57
F3
131
13
32
10
6.04E+07
Irradiated
90.97
F4
210
6
32
10
6.04E+07
Irradiated
97.22
98
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:105==
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
99
==PAGE:106==
J
Live/Dead counts and viability data for the experiment on Impact
of Scan Rate and Number of Scans on Cell Viability at 800 nm
Table J.1: Raw data of live and dead cell counts, irradiation parameters at 9.57 × 1010 W/m2.
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
282
7
32
5
1.53E13
Irradiated
97.58
A2
169
7
32
5
1.53E13
Irradiated
96.02
A3
128
2
32
5
1.53E13
Irradiated
98.46
A4
381
4
32
5
1.53E13
Control
98.96
B1
282
7
32
15
4.59E13
Irradiated
97.58
B2
315
13
32
15
4.59E13
Irradiated
96.04
B3
348
15
32
15
4.59E13
Irradiated
95.87
B4
385
9
32
15
4.59E13
Control
97.72
C1
315
10
32
30
9.19E13
Irradiated
96.92
C2
363
13
32
30
9.19E13
Irradiated
96.54
C3
331
10
32
30
9.19E13
Irradiated
97.07
C4
409
6
32
30
9.19E13
Control
98.55
D1
369
13
1.6
100
1.53E13
Irradiated
96.60
D2
381
7
1.6
100
1.53E13
Irradiated
98.20
D3
314
11
1.6
100
1.53E13
Irradiated
96.62
D4
402
4
1.6
100
1.53E13
Control
99.01
E1
546
6
4.8
100
4.59E13
Irradiated
98.91
E2
447
3
4.8
100
4.59E13
Irradiated
99.33
E3
402
17
4.8
100
4.59E13
Irradiated
95.94
E4
469
3
4.8
100
4.59E13
Control
99.36
F1
211
8
9.6
100
9.19E13
Irradiated
96.35
F2
257
6
9.6
100
9.19E13
Irradiated
97.72
F3
167
7
9.6
100
9.19E13
Irradiated
95.98
F4
458
12
9.6
100
9.19E13
Control
97.45
100
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:107==
Table J.2: Raw data of live and dead cell counts, irradiation parameters at 1.42 × 1011 W/m2
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
680
15
32
5
2.27E13
Irradiated
97.84
A2
577
31
32
5
2.27E13
Irradiated
94.90
A3
489
11
32
5
2.27E13
Irradiated
97.80
A4
569
3
32
5
2.27E13
Control
99.48
B1
655
76
32
15
6.81E13
Irradiated
89.60
B2
352
46
32
15
6.81E13
Irradiated
88.44
B3
500
52
32
15
6.81E13
Irradiated
90.58
B4
640
7
32
15
6.81E13
Control
98.92
C1
468
92
32
30
1.36E14
Irradiated
83.57
C2
387
48
32
30
1.36E14
Irradiated
88.97
C3
380
54
32
30
1.36E14
Irradiated
87.56
C4
745
9
32
30
1.36E14
Control
98.81
D1
803
7
1.6
100
2.27E13
Irradiated
99.14
D2
606
22
1.6
100
2.27E13
Irradiated
96.50
D3
658
20
1.6
100
2.27E13
Irradiated
97.05
D4
619
9
1.6
100
2.27E13
Control
98.57
E1
466
19
4.8
100
6.81E13
Irradiated
96.08
E2
728
40
4.8
100
6.81E13
Irradiated
94.79
E3
466
26
4.8
100
6.81E13
Irradiated
94.72
E4
817
6
4.8
100
6.81E13
Control
99.27
F1
582
33
9.6
100
1.36E14
Irradiated
94.63
F2
560
52
9.6
100
1.36E14
Irradiated
91.50
F3
502
43
9.6
100
1.36E14
Irradiated
92.11
F4
765
4
9.6
100
1.36E14
Control
99.48
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
101
==PAGE:108==
K
Live/Dead counts and viability data for 800 nm irradiation at
4.54 × 107 J/m2
Table K.1: Raw data of live and dead cell counts, irradiation parameters, and calculated live/dead ratios at 4.54 × 107 J/m2
Well Number/Area
Live Cell Count
Dead Cell Count
Dwell Time (µs)
Number of Frames
Average Power (mW)
Fluence (J/m2)
Condition
Live/Dead Ratio (%)
A1
230
35
32
6
100
4.54E7
Irradiated
86.79
A2
398
143
32
6
100
4.54E7
Irradiated
73.57
A3
518
255
32
6
100
4.54E7
Irradiated
67.01
A4
807
3
32
6
100
4.54E7
Control
99.63
B1
315
31
32
10
60
4.54E7
Irradiated
91.04
B2
392
47
32
10
60
4.54E7
Irradiated
89.29
B3
378
24
32
10
60
4.54E7
Irradiated
94.03
B4
353
3
32
10
60
4.54E7
Control
99.16
C1
340
3
32
40
15
4.54E7
Irradiated
99.13
C2
388
1
32
40
15
4.54E7
Irradiated
99.74
C3
373
1
32
40
15
4.54E7
Irradiated
99.73
C4
319
2
32
40
15
4.54E7
Control
99.38
102
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:109==
L
Excitation and emission spectra of CAM and EthD-1 with emission
filters
Figure L.1: Excitation (hollow dashed curves) and emission (filled curves) spectra for calcein AM (green curves) and Ethidium homodimer-1 (red curves)
plotted together with emission filters (filled squares).
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
103
==PAGE:110==
M
Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for
experiment on the Impact of Fluence on Cell Viability at 800 nm
Table M.1: One-tailed mean difference of two independent groups statistical power analysis for irradiated versus control groups at 800 nm with lower fluences
(32 µs pulse duration, 10 scans).
Fluence (J/m2)
Comparison
SD within each group
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (1.12 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
3.69
0.2439
0.05
0.80
1.50
174 / 262
3 / 6
Underpowered
B (1.73 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
4.48
0.0223
0.05
0.80
1.50
20722 / 31082
3 / 6
Underpowered
C (2.33 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
4.35
0.1609
0.05
0.80
1.50
399 / 599
3 / 6
Underpowered
D (3.06 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
3.77
0.8488
0.05
0.80
1.50
15 / 23
3 / 6
Underpowered
E (3.78 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
3.77
0.6101
0.05
0.80
1.50
29 / 43
3 / 6
Underpowered
F (4.54 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
7.57
2.3910
0.05
0.80
1.50
3 / 5
2 / 6
Underpowered
104
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:111==
N
Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for
experiment on the Impact of Fluence on Cell Viability at 1040 nm
Table N.1: One-tailed mean difference of two independent groups statistical power analysis for irradiated versus control groups at 800 nm with lower fluences
(32 µs pulse duration, 10 scans).
Well
Comparison
SD within each group
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (2.24 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
1.36
0.0735
0.05
0.80
1.50
1908 / 2862
3 / 6
Underpowered
B (2.77 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
1.44
0.0694
0.05
0.80
1.50
2140 / 3210
3 / 6
Underpowered
C (3.63 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
1.40
0.9286
0.05
0.80
1.50
13 / 19
3 / 6
Underpowered
D (4.48 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
1.40
0.1429
0.05
0.80
1.50
506 / 758
3 / 6
Underpowered
E (5.19 × 107 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
1.76
0.9091
0.05
0.80
1.50
14 / 20
3 / 6
Underpowered
F (6.04 × 107J/m2)
Irradiated vs Control
2.35
1.6170
0.05
0.80
1.50
5 / 7
3 / 6
Underpowered
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
105
==PAGE:112==
O
Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for
experiment on the Impact of Scan Rate and Number of Scans on
Cell Viability at 800 nm
Table O.1: One-tailed mean difference of two independent groups statistical power analysis for irradiated versus control groups under different laser conditions
at 9.57 × 1010 W/m2 mean irradiance.
Well
Comparison
SD within each group
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (32 µs / 5 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.926
1.248
0.05
0.80
1.50
8/12
3/6
Underpowered
B (32 µs / 15 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.822
0.781
0.05
0.80
1.50
18/26
3/6
Underpowered
C (32 µs / 30 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.665
2.504
0.05
0.80
1.50
3/5
3/6
Powered
D (1.6 µs / 100 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.814
1.687
0.05
0.80
1.50
5/7
3/6
Underpowered
E (4.8 µs / 100 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
1.182
0.377
0.05
0.80
1.50
74/110
3/6
Underpowered
F (9.6 µs / 100 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.814
2.246
0.05
0.80
1.50
3/5
3/6
Powered
Table O.2: Two-tailed mean difference of two independent groups power analysis comparing different dwell times and scan rates at equivalent fluence levels
at 9.57 × 1010 W/m2 mean irradiance
Well Comparison
Comparison
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (32 µs / 5 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2) / D (1.6 µs / 100 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
0.200
0.05
0.80
1.00
394/394
3/3
Underpowered
B (32 µs / 15 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2) / E (4.8 µs / 100 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
1.070
0.05
0.80
1.00
15/15
3/3
Underpowered
C (32 µs / 30 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2) / F (9.6 µs / 100 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
0.241
0.05
0.80
1.00
272/272
3/3
Underpowered
106
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:113==
Table O.3: One-tailed mean difference of two independent groups statistical power analysis for irradiated versus control groups at 1.42 × 1011 W/m2 .
Well
Comparison
SD within each group
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (32 µs / 5 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.956
2.341
0.05
0.80
1.50
3/5
3/6
Powered
B (32 µs / 15 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.655
14.571
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
Powered
C (32 µs / 30 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
1.529
8.102
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
Powered
D (1.6 µs / 100 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.810
1.883
0.05
0.80
1.50
4/6
3/6
Underpowered
E (4.8 µs / 100 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.521
7.464
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
Powered
F (9.6 µs / 100 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.943
6.720
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/6
Powered
Table O.4: Two-tailed mean difference of two independent groups power analysis comparing dwell times and scan rates at equivalent fluence levels at
1.42 × 1011 W/m2.
Well Comparison
Comparison
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (32 µs / 5 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2) / D (1.6 µs / 100 scans / 2.27 × 1013 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
0.461
0.05
0.80
1.00
75/75
3/3
Underpowered
B (32 µs / 15 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2) / E (4.8 µs / 100 scans / 6.81 × 1013 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
6.072
0.05
0.80
1.00
2/2
3/3
Powered
C (32 µs / 30 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2) / F (9.6 µs / 100 scans / 1.36 × 1014 J/m2)
Two irradiated groups
2.630
0.05
0.80
1.00
4/4
3/3
Underpowered
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
107
==PAGE:114==
P
Power analysis results for irradiated and control groups for
experiment on the Impact of Irradiance on Cell Viability at 800 nm
at 4.54 × 107 J/m2
Table P.1: One-tailed mean difference of two independent group power analysis comparing irradiated and control groups under equal fluence conditions at
800 nm.
Well
Comparison
Effect size (d = ∆/σ)
α
Power (1–β)
Ratio N2/N1
Required n/group
Current n/group
Interpretation
A (32 µs / 6 scans / 2.36 × 1011 W/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
3.311
0.05
0.80
1.50
3/3
3/3
Powered
B (32 µs / 10 scans / 1.42 × 1011 W/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
4.662
0.05
0.80
1.50
2/2
3/3
Powered
C (32 µs / 40 scans / 3.55 × 1010 W/m2)
Irradiated vs Controls
0.485
0.05
0.80
1.50
54/54
3/3
Underpowered
108
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:115==
Q
MATLAB Code for Image
Pre-processing
1 clear; clc; close all;
2
3 %% --- Select folder of images
4 folder = uigetdir(pwd, 'Select folder containing images');
5 if folder == 0
6
disp('User cancelled');
7
return;
8 end
9
10 % Supported image extensions
11 exts = {'*.tif','*.tiff','*.png','*.jpg','*.JPG','*.PNG'};
12 imgFiles = [];
13 for i = 1:length(exts)
14
files = dir(fullfile(folder, exts{i}));
15
imgFiles = [imgFiles; files];
16 end
17
18 numFiles = numel(imgFiles);
19 if numFiles == 0
20
error('No supported images found in folder.');
21 end
22 fprintf('Found %d images in folder.\n', numFiles);
23
24 %% Create main results folder and subfolders
25 resultsFolder = fullfile(folder , 'Results');
26 correctedFolder = fullfile(resultsFolder , 'CorrectedImages');
27 beforeAfterFolder = fullfile(resultsFolder , 'BeforeAfterFigures');
28 rowProfileFolder = fullfile(resultsFolder , 'RowProfiles');
29 colProfileFolder = fullfile(resultsFolder , 'ColumnProfiles');
30 histFolder = fullfile(resultsFolder , 'Histograms');
31
32 folders = {correctedFolder , beforeAfterFolder , rowProfileFolder ,
colProfileFolder , histFolder};
33 for i = 1:length(folders)
34
if ~exist(folders{i}, 'dir')
35
mkdir(folders{i});
36
end
37 end
38
39 %% Process each image
40 for k = 1:numFiles
41
file = imgFiles(k).name;
42
imgPath = fullfile(folder , file);
43
[~, name, ext] = fileparts(file);
44
45
fprintf('Processing %s (%d/%d)...\n', file, k, numFiles);
46
47
%% Read image
48
I0 = imread(imgPath , 3);
49
50
%% Global contrast enhancement
51
I_contrast = imadjust(I0, stretchlim(I0), []);
52
I_contrast = im2double(I_contrast);
53
54
[M, N] = size(I_contrast);
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
109
==PAGE:116==
55
56
%% Max intensity profile correction
57
rowProfile = max(I_contrast , [], 2);
58
colProfile = max(I_contrast , [], 1);
59
60
xRow = (1:M)';
61
xCol = (1:N);
62
pRow = polyfit(xRow, rowProfile , 3);
63
pCol = polyfit(xCol, colProfile , 3);
64
65
rowSmooth = polyval(pRow, xRow);
66
colSmooth = polyval(pCol, xCol);
67
68
rowSmooth = imgaussfilt(rowSmooth , 5);
69
colSmooth = imgaussfilt(colSmooth , 2);
70
71
vCorr = 1 ./ (rowSmooth + eps);
72
hCorr = 1 ./ (colSmooth + eps);
73
74
vCorr = min(max(vCorr, 0.8), 1.2);
75
hCorr = min(max(hCorr, 0.8), 1.2);
76
77
vMap = repmat(vCorr, 1, N);
78
hMap = repmat(hCorr, M, 1);
79
80
[M, N] = size(I_contrast);
81
vMap = imresize(vMap, [M N]);
82
hMap = imresize(hMap, [M N]);
83
correctionMap = vMap .* hMap;
84
85
%% Adaptive bottom -half intensity boost
86
midRow = floor(M/2);
87
topMean = mean(rowProfile(1:midRow));
88
bottomMean = mean(rowProfile(midRow+1:M));
89
adaptiveBoost = topMean / (bottomMean + eps);
90
adaptiveBoost = min(max(adaptiveBoost , 1), 2);
91
92
correctionMap((midRow+1):M, :) = correctionMap((midRow+1):M, :) *
adaptiveBoost;
93
correctionMap = imgaussfilt(correctionMap , 1);
94
95
%% Apply correction
96
I_corrected = I_contrast .* correctionMap;
97
I_corrected = I_corrected * (mean(I_contrast(:)) / (mean(I_corrected(:)) +
eps));
98
finalImage = mat2gray(I_corrected);
99
100
%% Save corrected image
101
outName = sprintf('%s_corrected%s', name, ext);
102
imwrite(finalImage , fullfile(correctedFolder , outName));
103
fprintf('Saved corrected image: %s\n', outName);
104
105
%% Save comparison and profiles
106
% Before/After
107
fig1 = figure('Visible','off');
108
subplot(1,2,1); imshow(I_contrast ,[]); title('Before Correction');
109
subplot(1,2,2); imshow(finalImage ,[]); title('After Correction');
110
saveas(fig1, fullfile(beforeAfterFolder , sprintf('%s_BeforeAfter.png',
name)));
111
close(fig1);
112
113
% Row profile
110
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:117==
114
fig2 = figure('Visible','off');
115
plot(max(I_contrast ,[],2),'r','LineWidth',1.3); hold on;
116
plot(max(finalImage ,[],2),'b','LineWidth',1.3);
117
xlabel('Row Index'); ylabel('Max Intensity');
118
legend('Before','After'); title('Row-wise Maximum Intensity');
119
grid on;
120
saveas(fig2, fullfile(rowProfileFolder , sprintf('%s_RowProfile.png', name)
));
121
close(fig2);
122
123
% Column profile
124
fig3 = figure('Visible','off');
125
plot(max(I_contrast ,[],1),'r','LineWidth',1.3); hold on;
126
plot(max(finalImage ,[],1),'b','LineWidth',1.3);
127
xlabel('Column Index'); ylabel('Max Intensity');
128
legend('Before','After'); title('Column -wise Maximum Intensity');
129
grid on;
130
saveas(fig3, fullfile(colProfileFolder , sprintf('%s_ColProfile.png', name)
));
131
close(fig3);
132
133
% Histogram
134
fig4 = figure('Visible','off');
135
subplot(1,2,1); histogram(I_contrast(:) ,256,'FaceColor','r');
136
title('Before Correction'); xlabel('Intensity'); ylabel('Count');
137
subplot(1,2,2); histogram(finalImage(:) ,256,'FaceColor','b');
138
title('After Correction'); xlabel('Intensity'); ylabel('Count');
139
saveas(fig4, fullfile(histFolder , sprintf('%s_Histogram.png', name)));
140
close(fig4);
141 end
142
143 disp('All images processed.');
Listing Q.1:
MATLAB script for image pre-processing, illumination correction, and intensity
normalization.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
111
==PAGE:118==
R
Fiji Macro for Cell Counting,
Segmentation, and CSV Export
1
// ==========================================
2
// Fiji Macro: Counting and .CSV saving
3
// ==========================================
4
5
// Ask user for input folder
6
inputDir = getDirectory("Choose a folder containing .tif images");
7
outputDir = inputDir + "Results/";
8
File.makeDirectory(outputDir);
9
10
// Summary CSV path
11
summaryPath = outputDir + "Summary_Cell_Counts.csv";
12
header = "Image,Cell_Count\n";
13
File.saveString(header, summaryPath);
14
15
//
Get list of .tif files
16
fileList = getFileList(inputDir);
17
18
roiManager("Show All");
19
20
for (i = 0; i < fileList.length; i++) {
21
22
if (endsWith(fileList[i], ".tif") || endsWith(fileList[i], ".tiff
")) {
23
24
// Open image
25
open(inputDir + fileList[i]);
26
title = getTitle();
27
print("Processing: " + title);
28
29
// --- Crop region of interest ---
30
makeRectangle(9, 0, 503, 512); // Dwell
31
//makeRectangle(35, 0, 477, 512); // SampleA_fluence
32
//makeRectangle(129, 0, 383, 512); // SampleC_fluence
33
//makeRectangle(90, 0, 422, 512);
34
run("Crop");
35
36
// Set scale
37
run("Set Scale...", "distance=1.56 known=1 pixel=1 unit=
micron global");
38
39
// Preprocess
40
run("Brightness/Contrast...");
41
//run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35"); // optional auto
-enhance
42
waitForUser("Adjust brightness/contrast , then click OK.");
43
run("Morphological Filters", "operation=[White Top Hat]
element=Disk radius=100");
44
run("Auto Threshold", "method=Otsu white");
45
setOption("BlackBackground", true);
46
run("Make Binary");
47
run("Watershed");
112
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:119==
48
49
// Analyze Particles
50
run("Analyze Particles...", "size=5.0-Infinity summarize add"
);
51
52
// Save ROI results (per image)
53
roiTableName = outputDir + replace(title, ".tif", "
_ROI_Values.csv");
54
if (isOpen("Results")) {
55
selectWindow("Results");
56
saveAs("Results", roiTableName);
57
print("Saved ROI-level data for: " + roiTableName);
58
}
59
60
// ROI count from ROI Manager
61
nROIs = roiManager("count");
62
print("Cells detected in " + title + ": " + nROIs);
63
64
// Summary CSV
65
line = title + "," + nROIs + "\n";
66
File.append(line, summaryPath);
67
68
// Duplicate image for annotation
69
run("Duplicate...", "title=Processed_for_Annotation");
70
roiManager("Show All");
71
setColor("yellow");
72
roiManager("Show All with Labels");
73
74
// Scale bar
75
run("Scale Bar...", "width=50 height=5 font=18 color=White
background=None location=[Lower Right] bold");
76
77
// Save annotated processed image
78
saveAs("Tiff", outputDir + replace(title, ".tif", "
_processed_annotated.tif"));
79
close();
80
81
// Save ROI set
82
roiManager("Save", outputDir + replace(title, ".tif", "_ROIs.
zip"));
83
84
// Clean up
85
run("Clear Results");
86
roiManager("Reset");
87
close();
88
}
89
}
90
91
print("Finished processing all images!");
Listing R.1: Fiji macro for automated image segmentation, thresholding, and cell counting with
CSV output.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
113
==PAGE:120==
S
Fiji Macro for Merging Red and Green
Channels into Composite Images and
set scale bars and cropping when is
needed
1
redFolder = getDirectory("Choose folder with RED channel images");
2
greenFolder = getDirectory("Choose folder with GREEN channel images");
3
saveFolder = getDirectory("Choose folder to save merged images");
4
5
redFiles = getFileList(redFolder);
6
greenFiles = getFileList(greenFolder);
7
Array.sort(redFiles);
8
Array.sort(greenFiles);
9
10
ri = 0;
11
gi = 0;
12
13
while (ri < redFiles.length && gi < greenFiles.length) {
14
// skip non-tif in RED
15
while (ri < redFiles.length && !(endsWith(redFiles[ri], ".tif") ||
endsWith(redFiles[ri], ".tiff")))
16
ri++;
17
// skip non-tif in GREEN
18
while (gi < greenFiles.length && !(endsWith(greenFiles[gi], ".tif"
) || endsWith(greenFiles[gi], ".tiff")))
19
gi++;
20
21
if (ri >= redFiles.length || gi >= greenFiles.length) break;
22
23
redPath = redFolder + redFiles[ri];
24
greenPath = greenFolder + greenFiles[gi];
25
baseName = substring(redFiles[ri], 0, lastIndexOf(redFiles[ri], ".
"));
26
print("Pairing: " + redFiles[ri] + " with " + greenFiles[gi]);
27
28
// --- RED CHANNEL ---
29
open(redPath);
30
redImage = getTitle();
31
selectImage(redImage);
32
run("Set Scale...", "distance=1.56 known=1 pixel=1 unit=micron
global");
33
34
//makeRectangle(90, 0, 422, 512); // optional cropping
35
//run("Crop");
36
37
run("Brightness/Contrast...");
38
run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35");
39
waitForUser("Adjust brightness/contrast for the RED channel , then
click OK.");
40
run("8-bit");
41
114
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:121==
42
// --- GREEN CHANNEL ---
43
open(greenPath);
44
greenImage = getTitle();
45
selectImage(greenImage);
46
47
//makeRectangle(90, 0, 422, 512); // optional cropping
48
//run("Crop");
49
50
run("Gaussian Blur...", "sigma=0.6");
51
run("Brightness/Contrast...");
52
run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35");
53
waitForUser("Adjust brightness/contrast for the GREEN channel ,
then click OK.");
54
run("8-bit");
55
56
// --- MERGE CHANNELS ---
57
run("Merge Channels...", "c1=[" + redImage + "] c2=[" + greenImage
+ "] create keep");
58
mergedImage = getTitle();
59
selectImage(mergedImage);
60
run("Brightness/Contrast...");
61
run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35");
62
waitForUser("Adjust brightness/contrast for the MERGED image, then
click OK.");
63
64
// Add scale bar
65
run("Scale Bar...", "width=50 height=5 font=18 color=White
background=None location=[Lower Right] bold");
66
67
// --- SAVE COMPOSITE OUTPUTS ---
68
saveAs("Tiff", saveFolder + baseName + "_Merged.tif");
69
saveAs("PNG", saveFolder + baseName + "_Merged.png");
70
71
// --- CLEANUP ---
72
close(redImage);
73
close(greenImage);
74
close(mergedImage);
75
76
print("Saved: " + baseName + "_Merged.tif and .png to " +
saveFolder);
77
78
ri++;
79
gi++;
80
}
Listing S.1: Fiji macro for merging red and green fluorescence channel images into composite
outputs with optional cropping and scale bars.
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
115
==PAGE:122==
T
Fiji Macro for Scale Bars at the NIR
Images
1
// Ask user to select the folder containing BMP images
2
inputDir = getDirectory("Choose a folder containing .bmp images");
3
outputDir = inputDir + "Results/";
4
File.makeDirectory(outputDir);
5
fileList = getFileList(inputDir);
6
7
for (i = 0; i < fileList.length; i++) {
8
9
if (endsWith(fileList[i], ".bmp") || endsWith(fileList[i], ".BMP"
)) {
10
11
// Open image
12
open(inputDir + fileList[i]);
13
title = getTitle();
14
print("Processing: " + title);
15
16
// Convert to 8-bit (optional , required for some operations)
17
//run("8-bit");
18
19
// Set scale (example: 2.7 pixels = 1 micron)
20
run("Set Scale...", "distance=2.7 known=1 pixel=1 unit=micron
global");
21
22
// Add yellow scale bar (40 µm wide, 8 µm high)
23
run("Scale Bar...", "width=40 height=8 font=24 color=Yellow
background=None location=[Lower Left] bold");
24
25
// Save image as PNG in output folder
26
saveAs("PNG", outputDir + replace(title, ".bmp", "
_Scaled_annotated.png"));
27
28
// Close image before next iteration
29
close();
30
}
31
}
32
33
print("All images processed and saved in: " + outputDir);
Listing T.1: Fiji macro for adding scale bars and annotations to NIR camera images.
116
Classification and assessment of laser-induced damage of mammalian cells
==PAGE:123==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
