==PAGE:1==
Assessment and usage of the segment any­
thing model for semi­automatic labelling in
precision agriculture
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling
in precision agriculture
Master Thesis
November, 2025
By
William Buch Grønholm
Supervisors: Mathies Brinks Sørensen and Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Remote sensing with satellite imagery is used in crop yield prediction and precision agri­
culture to monitor crop health and optimize planting schedules. They both require crop
field labeling, which often depends heavily on human input. This thesis assesses SAM’s
(Segment Anything Model’s) ability to segment crop fields in low­resolution (Sentinel­
2) and high­resolution (PlanetFusion) satellite images, with and without fine­tuning and
super­resolution models for image enhancement. It further explores the potential for clas­
sifying the segments as crop fields or not crop fields and by crop type. The point­grid seg­
mentation showed no significant difference between Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion, while
the single­point segmentation showed an approximately 19% higher performance based
on IoU for PlanetFusion compared to Sentinel­2. Fine­tuning SAM improved the single­
point segmentation by 27.9% based on IoU, while the use of super­resolution models had
no positive effect on the segmentation. Classification of the segments resulted in 93.5%
accuracy on both Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion for crop field or not a crop field classifi­
cation, and 69.6% and 73.6% accuracy on Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion, respectively, for
crop type classification.
Abstract (Danish)
Remote sensing med satellitbilleder anvendes inden for forudsigelse af høstudbytte og
præcisionslandbrug, hvor planternes sundhed overvåges, og såning, gødskning, sprøjt­
ning og høst planlægges. Dette speciale vurderer SAMs (Segment Anything Models)
evne til at segmentere landbrugsmarker i satellitbilleder med lav opløsning (Sentinel­2) og
høj opløsning (PlanetFusion), både med og uden fine­tuning samt brug af super­resolution
modeller til at forbedre kvaliteten af satellitbillederne med lav opløsning. Yderligere un­
dersøges potentialet for at klassificere segmenterne som enten mark eller ikke­mark samt
efter marktype. Point­grid­segmenteringen viste ingen signifikant forskel på Sentinel­2 og
PlanetFusion, mens single­point­segmenteringen viste en cirka 19% bedre segmentering
baseret på IoU for PlanetFusion sammenlignet med Sentinel­2. Fine­tuning forbedrede
single­point­segmenteringen med cirka 27,9% baseret på IoU, mens super­resolution­
modellerne ikke havde nogen positiv effekt på segmenteringen. Klassificeringen viste en
nøjagtighed på 93,5% for både Sentinel­2 og PlanetFusion ved mark­ eller ikke­mark­
klassificering samt en nøjagtighed på henholdsvis 69,6% og 73,6% for klassificering af
marktype.
ii
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Method
3
2.1
Pipeline overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Segmentation with SAM 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4
Explainability with SHAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5
Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Data description
20
4
Results
22
4.1
Segmentation with SAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
Explainability with SHAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.4
Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Discussion
45
6
Conclusion
48
7
Apendix
49
7.1
Band histograms for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.2
Single­band segmentation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7.3
Point­grid segmentation results using SAM’s default hyperparameters . . . 51
7.4
Histograms for the single­point segmentation results for Sentinel­2 and
PlanetFusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.5
Histograms for the single­point segmentation results for the original and
fine­tuned SAM model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.6
Prompt­based test results for CLIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.7
Vegetation index formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.8
Texture feature formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.9
Additional results for crop field vs. not a crop field classification . . . . . . . 56
7.10 Additional results for crop type classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.11 Additional feature analysis by crop type
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7.12 Example of Sentinel­2 tile with top three features for corn as channels . . . 60
Bibliography
63
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Remote sensing is used in precision agriculture[1] and crop yield prediction[2], as produc­
tion depends on landscape factors such as soil type, weather, nutrient deficiencies, and
diseases[1]. Productivity can quickly change, and timely satellite imagery is important for
accurate crop yield prediction to support the increasing global food demand[2]. In preci­
sion agriculture, remote sensing using satellite imagery helps farmers ”monitor crop health
in real time, identifying areas affected by pests, diseases, or nutrient deficiencies”[1] and
in combination with machine learning to optimize planting schedules[1].
To leverage machine learning models in combination with remote sensing, the labeling of
agricultural fields is required in both precision agriculture and yield prediction. However,
the process of labeling is challenging and time­consuming, as it often depends heavily on
human input[3]. To mitigate this challenge, a zero­shot segmentation model, such as the
segment anything model (SAM), presents a promising opportunity for easing the process
of manual labeling. When looking at the literature, SAM has shown good segmentation
results across a variety of domains[4]. For instance, Wang (2023)[5] explored SAM’s zero­
shot segmentation capabilities across nine datasets, resulting in a high IoU of 0.735 for
medical images and 0.652 for forests in satellite images. Yet, its capabilities for crop field
segmentation are largely untested. SAM’s functionality is limited to instance segmentation
and cannot classify the instances. Therefore, this thesis explores the possibility of crop
field labeling using SAM combined with machine learning models for a semi­automatic
process with less human input.
In the works of Osco (2023)[3], SAM’s single­point segmentation capabilities were evalu­
ated on high­resolution (0.04 m/px) UAV images for trees and houses, achieving an IoU of
0.85 and 0.86, respectively. They similarly achieved an IoU of 0.57 and 0.38 on high res­
olution satellite images (0.3 m/px) on a multi­class dataset with objects such as buildings,
roads, forests and farms[3]. Teng (2025)[6] evaluated SAM’s point­grid segmentation on
high­resolution UAV images of tree crowns, achieving an ABO (Equation 2.11) of 35.06
using a 100×100 point grid. Both Osco (2023)[3] and Teng (2025)[6] improved the seg­
mentation with object segmentation to provide better prompts for SAM, a bounding box
for Osco (2023)[3], and a targeted point prompt for Teng (2025)[6]. Scribano (2025)[7],
published during this thesis work, evaluated SAM’s point­grid segmentation for crop fields
in Italy, achieving an average recall of 15.1 without fine­tuning and 42.9 with fine­tuning
on Sentinel­2 images.
When collecting remote sensing data, a major consideration is the cost of satellite im­
agery, where the expense increases with a higher spatial resolution. The higher reso­
lution is often required when performing a semantic segmentation task, as human pre­
cision labelling often requires multiple pixels to lower annotation errors. On the other
hand, SAM has the capability of accurate segmentation using very few pixels, as pointed
out by the original SAM paper[8]. However, SAM is highly dataset dependent. This is
showcased in a study by Mazurowski, where SAM was evaluated for multiple biomedical
imagery sets, producing IoU as low as 0.11 on some datasets and up to 0.86 on others [9].
Therefore, this thesis aims to evaluate the difference in SAM segmentation performance
between low­resolution (Sentinel­2) and high­resolution (PlanetFusion) satellite images
using single­point and point­grid segmentation, with and without fine­tuning, to determine
if the SAM performance is equal across the cost of the imagery. To the best of my knowl­
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
1
==PAGE:8==
edge, such a comparison has never been done before, and therefore, this thesis seeks
to explore the capabilities of SAM on different spatial resolutions.
Additionally, this thesis aims to evaluate the effect of using the super­resolution models
LDM­SR and Satlas Super Resolution to improve the quality of low­resolution images
for segmentation, as a possible cost­saving alternative to high­resolution imagery. This
approach is similarly untested for segmentation using the SAM model. Osco (2023)[3]
notes that super­resolution can ”theoretically enhance the performance of SAM with low­
resolution images”, while Deng (2025)[10] achieved a 9.5% improvement in F1­score us­
ing super­resolution compared to bilinear­interpolation upscaling for semantic segmenta­
tion of Sentinel­2 images using their own segmentation model.
In addition to the evaluation of segmentation, this thesis explores the potential for classi­
fying the segments as crop fields or not crop fields, and by crop type, using embeddings
from the CLIP model, spectral features, and aggregated seasonal features. In remote
sensing, semantic segmentation (per­pixel classification) of crop fields in Sentinel­2 im­
ages has shown good results, with Yang (2020)[11] achieving an accuracy of 94.27% and
Mathur (2008)[12] achieving an accuracy of 91%. However, the combination of SAM and
the classification of segments across different spatial resolutions remains unexplored in
remote sensing. Therefore, this thesis aims to combine segmentation and classification
into one pipeline by classifying the segments, using both fine­tuning and super­resolution
models to improve segmentation, and comparing performance between the low and high
resolution images.
2
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:9==
2
Method
This section describes the methods used to segment and classify crop fields in this thesis.
An overview of the pipeline is described first, followed by details of each part.
2.1
Pipeline overview
The pipeline for this thesis is shown in Figure 2.1. During preprocessing, the satellite
images from the two sources were divided into smaller tiles, cloudy tiles were removed,
and band values were clipped. The tiles were upscaled using two super­resolution mod­
els, Satlas Super Resolution and LDM­SR. SAM’s segmentation was explored, and the
segmentation performance across all tiles for both sources was compared along with five
fine­tuning methods. The resulting segments were categorized as crop fields (along with
crop type) and not crop fields. Five feature sets were computed, three based on embed­
dings from the CLIP model[13] and two based on raw band values, texture features, and
vegetation indices (of which one aggregated the features by month). In the end, three
models were used to classify the segments: logistic regression, focal logistic regression,
and XGBoost. The best performing model was assessed using SHAP and active learning.
Figure 2.1: Pipeline overview.
2.2
Segmentation with SAM 2
SAM 2 is a pretrained model from Meta for general image and video segmentation with
zero­shot prediction capability. It is trained on large datasets such as SA­1B with 11
million images and 1.1 billion masks[14] and YouTube­VOS with 5.000 videos and almost
190.000 masks[15].
The model is based on a transformer architecture with an image encoder, prompt encoder,
and mask decoder as seen in figure 2.2. It also has a memory encoder, memory attention,
and a memory bank for storing and linking image features across frames in a video to avoid
repetitive image encoding[4], but since this thesis focuses only on images, this part will
not be described.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.2: Overview of the SAM 2 architecture[4].
The image encoder consists of a pre­trained Hiera model. Hiera is a simplified version
of MViTv2, where most components are removed, so training is based only on self­
attention[16]. In self­attention, the image is divided into patches, like small crops of the
image. Each patch is embedded in X = xW + b, where x is the pixel values and W are
the weights to be learned, and the query, key and value projections are constructed as
Equation 2.1.
Q = XWQ,
K = XWK,
V = XWV
(2.1)
The concept is that information about an individual patch can be derived not only from
the pixels in the patch itself but also from other similar or related patches in the image.
For example, a patch can contain part of an object, and to learn that, other patches are
relevant. The query and key dot product emphasizes how relevant another patch’s infor­
mation is for the current patch, while the V adds the information to the prediction. The
attention output is given in Equation 2.2 [17] using softmax, Equation 2.15, where D is the
dimension of Q and K.
Z = Softmax
(QK⊤
√
D
)
V
(2.2)
The self­attention occurs in four stages. The first stage uses the smallest patches, and in
each consecutive stage, the patches are merged 2x2. This way, the first stages focus on
smaller details like edges, while the last stages focus on larger structures in the image.
These embeddings are essentially the learned image features. For efficiency, the self­
attention is not computed globally (across the entire image). Instead it is computed as
mask unit attention, meaning locally in fixed (not sliding), non­overlapping windows[16].
During the pretraining of SAM’s image encoder, they applied the MAE strategy, where
a subset of the patches is hidden in the encoder and predicted in the decoder. This
is basically an unsupervised approach to achieving an image encoder that already has
some understanding of images.
The prompt encoder simply combines the encoded point position with a learned embed­
ding that tells the model if it is foreground or background into a single embedding[18].
The mask decoder takes the prompt and image embeddings (from the prompt and im­
age encoder) and updates them based on cross­attention[18], prompt to image (image
query, prompt key, prompt value) and image to prompt, to emphasize the relevant image
features and location. The final embeddings are passed to an MLP, which computes the
mask(s). The mask decoder also computes the IoU between the predicted and ground
4
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:11==
truth mask and trains an MLP that predicts it[4]. The predicted IoU score is used by the
pred_iou_thresh hyper­parameter mentioned later.
The SAM 2 implementation provides two objects for segment prediction. The SAM2­
ImagePredictor generates predictions based on prompts as points, bounding boxes, or
masks. The SAM2AutomaticMaskGenerator is a wrapper around the SAM2ImagePredictor
that generates predictions based on a point grid. The SAM2ImagePredictor, which will be
referenced as single­point segmentation in the thesis, is therefore relevant when the loca­
tions of the objects to be segmented are known, while the SAM2AutomaticMaskGenerator,
point­grid segmentation, is relevant when the locations of the objects are not known.
In this thesis, the point­grid segmentation was used for the overall assessment of how well
crop fields can be segmented, while the single­point segmentation was used for examining
score drift during fine­tuning and comparisons without the thresholding required for point­
grid segmentation.
2.2.1
Hyper­parameter and band exploration
The point­grid segmentation has 14 hyperparameters where only six are relevant for the
assessment, since its built­in features for cropping and manual point grids will not be used.
The relevant hyper­parameters are described below.
• pred_iou_thresh is a [0,1] threshold used to filter predictions based on their pre­
dicted IoU. As mentioned, the mask decoder contains an MLP that predicts the IoU
between the ground truth mask and the prediction mask. At inference, it represents
a quality score of the prediction, indicating how well the prediction is expected to
overlap with the object. A high threshold for IoU is expected to produce fewer pre­
dictions that more accurately fit the objects.
• stability_score_thresh is a [0,1] threshold used to filter predictions and is based on
their stability along with stability _score_offset. In the implementation, stability is
computed as the IoU between the two masks generated when thresholding the pre­
diction’s logits with a positive offset (stability_score_offset) and a negative offset
added to the general threshold (zero)[19]. It can be expressed as
Stability(mp) = |mp > (threshold + offset)|
|mp > (threshold −offset)|
where mp is the raw prediction mask, the threshold is the global threshold for dif­
ferentiating between the foreground and the background and offset is the stabil­
ity_score_offset.
The stability score indicates how stable (unchanged) a prediction is when the thresh­
old is slightly changed. A prediction for a crop field with sharp, well­defined edges
is expected to have a high stability score, while a crop field in a blurry image is
expected to have a low stability score. Therefore, it indicates the accuracy of the
shape of the prediction. A high threshold for stability is expected to produce fewer
predictions with more accurate shapes.
• box_nms_thresh is a [0,1] threshold used to filter predictions with overlapping bound­
ing boxes based on their IoU. If two predictions’ bounding boxes have an IoU larger
than the threshold, then the one with the lowest predicted IoU score (the IoU score
used by pred_iou_thresh) is removed. A low value for box_nms_thresh is expected
to produce fewer and less overlapping predictions.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
5
==PAGE:12==
• points_per_side defines the size of the point grid, where each point is passed to the
SAM2ImagePredictor to generate a prediction. A high value for points_per_side is
expected to produce more (and often overlapping) predictions.
• points_per_batch defines the number of points that are simultaneously processed
by the SAM2ImagePredictor. A larger value is expected to reduce the inference
time if it fits in the GPU’s memory without affecting the predictions.
This thesis also implemented an NMS threshold (named area_nms_thresh) based on
the IoU for the exact area instead of the bounding box IoU (like box_nms_thresh). The
implementation follows that the predictions are first ordered (in descending order) in a list
by their predicted IoU scores. Then, each prediction’s IoU with any previous prediction in
the list is computed, and if the IoU exceeds the threshold, the prediction is removed.
The hyperparameters were explored by varying one parameter at a time, selecting a good
value and locking it, starting with the default values. It does not guarantee the best selec­
tion of hyperparameters, as starting in a different order could lead to a different choice,
but it gives an understanding of how they work. The results can be found in Section 4.1.1,
where each measurement is based on 250 random samples (tiles). To reduce the vari­
ance in the plots, the 250 random samples were selected based on the same seed in
each measurement.
Hyperparameter
Selected
Default
points_per_side
32
32
points_per_batch
128
64
pred_iou_thresh
0.8
0.8
stability_score_thresh
0.8
0.95
box_nms_thresh
0.4
0.7
Table 2.1: Selected hyperparameters after exploration compared to their default values
used in the SAM configuration.
The results of the final comparison between Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion can be found
in Section 4.1.2 and were on the entire number of tiles listed in Table 2.7 and the hy­
perparameters listed in Table 2.1. points_per_batch was increased for efficiency, while
stability_score_thresh was lowered to capture more predictions and box_nms_thresh
was lowered to avoid too many overlapping predictions that could inflate the performance
measurements.
During this thesis, it was found that comparison using the point­grid approach was unre­
liable. It produces up to 1024 predictions (when using 32 points per grid) and therefore
relies heavily on thresholding values, which turned out to be non­stable across the two
sources and drifting during fine­tuning. Without thresholding, the many overlapping pre­
dictions inflate the performance measurements. The results during this thesis therefore,
shift towards the single­point approach, which uses the center of the bounding box of a
ground truth mask as a point prompt and measures the IoU between the ground truth
object and the prediction. This often provides a more fair basis for comparison.
2.2.2
Fine­tuning SAM
The fine­tuning was based on SAM’s fine­tuning script. Each tile was upscaled to 1024×1024
pixels using nearest neighbor to match the required size. In each epoch, the dataset was
loaded and up to 40 random ground truth masks (in random order) were included per tile,
as a larger number of masks per image exceeded the available GPU memory on DTU’s
6
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:13==
HPC cluster. Similarly, in each epoch, the tiles were randomly affected by rotation, flip­
ping, resizing (and cropping), jittering and random ordering using SAM’s built­in functions
to introduce variability and reduce the model’s tendency to overfit.
The model was trained with only one tile per batch, again due to memory limitations, and
all tiles were used in each epoch. It used the AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of
0.1, moving the weights toward zero for regularization in each optimization step, as shown
in Equation 2.3[20], and the default learning rates of 5 × 10−6 for the base learning rate
and 3 × 10−6 for the image encoder. The learning rates were adjusted using the cosine
parameter scheduler CosineParamScheduler, which gradually reduced the learning rate
toward zero following a cosine curve.
θt ←θt−1 −γλθt−1
(2.3)
In AdamW, the learning rate is applied through the momentum m (Equation 2.4) and
velocity v (Equation 2.5), which represent the exponential means of the past gradients
(squared past gradients for v), controlling the direction and scaling of the learning rate.
In Equations 2.4 and 2.5, the constants β1 and β2 control how much weight is assigned to
past gradients versus the current gradient when computing the momentum and velocity.
So, the momentum and velocity push the weights toward values that minimize the loss
function, while the weight decay simultaneously pushes the weights toward zero, together
favoring weights that minimize the loss function with small weights.
mt ←β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(2.4)
vt ←β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
(2.5)
The loss function combined weighted terms for the IoU, dice and predicted mask losses
against the ground­truth mask, with weights of 1, 1 and 20.
The fine­tuning was explored using five different methods shown in Table 2.2. The Base­
line method used all tiles with no frozen components. The EncFrozen method used all
tiles but with the image encoder frozen (by setting its learning rate to zero). The IoU>50,
IoU>80 and ExcludeMRF methods had no frozen components but only used a subset of
the ground truth masks. The ExcludeMRF method excluded the ground truth masks for
meadows, root crops and forage crops, while the IoU>50 and IoU>80 methods only used
ground truth masks with a single­point segmentation IoU above 0.5 and 0.8, respectively.
Method
Description
Filter
Frozen
Baseline
All masks
None
None
EncFrozen
All masks encoder frozen
None
Encoder
IoU>50
IoU≥0.50 prefiltered
IoU≥0.50 vs prediction (prefilter)
None
IoU>80
IoU≥0.80 prefiltered
IoU≥0.80 vs prediction (prefilter)
None
ExcludeMRF
Exclude meadow root forage
Class exclude: 7, 8 and 9
None
Table 2.2: SAM fine­tuning methods.
The methods IoU>50, IoU>80, and ExcludeMRF were included because the segmen­
tation results (Figures 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, and 4.11) showed that the performance depends
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
7
==PAGE:14==
strongly on the crop type and the distinctness of the crop field boundaries. It was a con­
cern that crop fields like meadows, which as shown in Figures 4.7 are often small and
lack well­defined borders, could confuse the model during training and introduce noise.
The method ExcludeMRF was inspired by Song (2025)[21], which describes the fine­
tuning approach used by the winners of the PVUW Challenge. One of their main strategies
was to freeze the image encoder and use the base learning rate of 5 × 10−6.
2.2.3
Super­resolution
In this thesis, the two following models for super­resolution were used to evaluate whether
their output would improve SAM’s segmentation.
Satlas Super Resolution
Satlas Super Resolution is a model trained for upscaling satellite images. It is based on the
ESRGAN model and is trained on the S2­NAIP dataset[22], which consists of 1.2 million
pairs of Sentinel­2 and NAIP images with sizes of 32×32 and 128×128, respectively, from
the United States. It, therefore, upscales by a factor of four.
The ESRGAN model is a further development of SRGAN[22], which goal is to create re­
alistic upscaled images using a generator and a discriminator component. The generator
takes a low­resolution images, upscales them and feeds them to the discriminator. The
discriminator takes the generated images from the generator and the real high­resolution
images and predicts which are real and which are generated, thereby solving the Min­max
problem in equation 2.6[23].
min
G max
D
EIHR[log D(IHR)] + EILR[log(1 −D(G(ILR)))]
(2.6)
Here, D is the discriminator’s prediction for an image as a probability, where a low value
indicates a generated image and a high value indicates a real high­resolution image. The
discriminator’s prediction for the generated image, D(G(I(n)
LR)), is then fed back to the
generator and used in its loss function shown in Equation 2.7[23].
lGen
SR =
N
∑
n=1
−log D(G(I(n)
LR))
(2.7)
The generator therefore tries to fool the discriminator, while the discriminator tries to dis­
tinguish the real images from the generated ones. This dynamic forces the generator to
create more realistic images.
Since this thesis uses CLIP for classification, it is noteworthy that Satlas Super Resolution
uses the L1 loss that minimizes a CLIPScore as its loss function[22]. The CLIPScore is
simply the cosine similarity between the CLIP embeddings of the generated and high­
resolution images, indicating how similar they are.
Satlas Super Resolution has five models for upscaling, which combine either 1, 2, 4, 8 or
16 images of the same area per upscaling. A higher number of images used per upscale
is expected to produce a more accurate result with less noise. They are computationally
heavier to compute, and when tiles are combined, it is no longer possible to test on all
tiles. The results are therefore based on 400 upscaled tiles, each combining random tiles
from the same area. The 400 tile areas were sampled with replacement to mimic the
distribution of tile areas after the cloud masks was applied (each source was cropped into
100 tile areas as explained in Section 2.2.4).
8
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:15==
CompVis’s LDM­SR
While Satlas Super Resolution was chosen based on its training on satellite images, LDM­
SR was chosen based on a first impression of its upscaled images. An example is shown
in Figure 2.3, with a raw Sentinel­2 image on the left and the same image upscaled with
LDM­SR on the right. LDM­SR is trained on Open Images Dataset, which consists of 9
million images from Flickr[24], and upscales by a factor of four.
It is a latent diffusion model, meaning that it is trained to gradually denoise in a latent
space for efficiency and to ”focus on the important, semantic bits of the data”[25]. The
denoising is trained in steps, where the model predicts the less noisy image. The effect of
the denoising steps (shown in Figure 4.16) was evaluated using 500 samples (tiles) per
measurement, and the value of 10 denoising steps was used for the comparison between
the raw Sentinel­2 images and the Sentinel­2 LDM­SR upscaled images across all tiles.
(a) Raw Sentinel­2 image
(b) LDM­SR upscaled image
Figure 2.3: Example comparison between raw Sentinel­2 image and its LDM­SR
upscaled version
Blending
A difference between Satlas Super Resolution and LDM­SR is that Satlas Super Resolu­
tion only takes images of 32x32 pixels, while LDM­SR takes images of any size as long
as it fits in the GPU’s memory. So, for upscaling using Satlas Super Resolution, the tiles
were cropped into even smaller patches, upscaled and stitched together. The results, as
shown in Figure 4.13a, showed a chessboard­like structure that could negatively impact
the segmentation.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
9
==PAGE:16==
(a)
Thick
black
lines
show
non­overlapping structure,
red
lines show the structure used for
blending
(b)
Illustration
of
the
cosine­
weighted blending.
A blending method was used to reduce the borders between neighboring tiles. Instead of
cropping a tile into non­overlapping patches, shown as the thick black lines in Figure 2.4a,
the tiles were cropped into overlapping patches, shown as the thin red lines in Figure 2.4a.
The Sentinel­2 tiles are 240×240 pixels, meaning that for non­overlapping patches, there
are 8×8 smaller patches, while for overlapping patches, an additional six patches are
added per row and column, resulting in 14×14 smaller patches.
To blend the overlapping patches, each patch was multiplied by the Hanning window[26]
(Equation 2.8), which resembles the first part of a cosine curve, where the slopes at both
ends have a value of zero. As shown in Figure 2.4b, it gives stronger weights to the center
pixels in a tile. After stitching the patches back together to the original 240×240 pixels,
the pixel values were normalized by dividing the sum of their intensities by the sum of the
weights.
w(n) = 0.5 −0.5 cos
( 2πn
M −1
)
,
0 ≤n ≤M −1
(2.8)
2.2.4
Evaluation
Since the Sentinel­2 images contain clouds, the images were reduced to those with either
no clouds or partial cloud cover. As a result, only 50 images were used for area A and 44
images were used for area B. The remaining images were too clouded. The images with
partial cloud cover were manually masked, as seen in Figure 2.5, using the tool Napari.
10
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:17==
(a) Clear
(b) Partly clouded
(c) Fully clouded
Figure 2.5: Sentinel­2 examples with manually added cloud masks
To make the segmentation computationally efficient, the satellite images from both sources
were cropped into tiles. The resolution of the Sentinel­2 images is 2400×2400 pixels,
while the resolution of the PlanetFusion images is 8000×8000 pixels. After cropping, the
Sentinel­2 tiles had a resolution of 240×240 pixels and the PlanetFusion tiles had a res­
olution of 800×800 pixels, so images from both sources were cropped into 100 possible
tiles.
The method for segmentation evaluation is inspired by Guidelines to Compare Semantic
Segmentation Maps at Different Resolutions[27]. Since the article focuses on semantic
segmentation and this thesis uses instance segmentation, this thesis adapted two of its
suggested approaches. The cropped tiles should cover the same area for both sources,
meaning that all cropped tiles exist in pairs, one for Sentinel­2 and one for PlanetFu­
sion, and predictions should be compared at the same (high) resolution. To achieve the
latter, the masks for Sentinel­2 were, during pre­processing, rasterized at both low (origi­
nal) resolution (for visualization) and high resolution (matching PlanetFusion) for compar­
ison. When comparing the predicted and ground truth masks for Sentinel­2, the predicted
masks were upscaled using nearest­neighbor.
To ensure that the tile pairs across sources were as comparable as possible, they cover
not only the same area but also the same days. During preprocessing, the manual cloud
mask was applied to both sources, allowing only tiles with less than 5% cloud cover to be
used. As a result, as seen in Table 2.7, the number of tiles in each area (A and B) is the
same across the two sources. An example of a tile pair is shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Example of tile pair from
Sentinel­2 (left) and PlanetFusion
(right)
Source
Area
Tiles
Sentinel­2
A
3860
Sentinel­2
B
3131
PlanetFusion
A
3860
PlanetFusion
B
3131
Figure 2.7: Number of image tiles used per
source for areas A and B from Sentinel­2
(S2) and PlanetFusion (PS).
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
11
==PAGE:18==
Metrics
In instance segmentation, the pixel­wise IoU (equation 2.9) and Dice score are often
used to calculate the overlap of a prediction for a given ground truth mask[28]. Evalu­
ating SAM’s ability to segment crop fields in satellite images is different, as SAM likely
produces multiple instance predictions for the same image, which likely also has more
than one ground truth mask. This raises the question of which prediction to compare with
which ground truth mask. This thesis therefore uses the Best Average Overlap (ABO)[29],
sometimes referred to as the Aggregated Jaccard Index (AJI)[28], which for each ground
truth mask selects the prediction that has the highest IoU and then averages all IoUs[29].
It describes how well the the ground truth masks overlap with the best predictions.
IoU(p, g) = |p ∩g|
|p ∪g|
(2.9)
Along with the ABO (equation 2.10), this thesis also introduces a weighted ABO (equation
2.11) as a supplement to ABO, where the average of the IoUs is weighted based on the
size of the ground truth mask in pixels. This metric is included, because some of the crop
fields (e.g. meadows) are much smaller than other crop fields. The weighted ABO there­
fore better aligns with the impression one gets when visually inspecting the predictions on
top of the ground truth masks. The ABOs and weighted ABOs are calculated per tile and
averaged across all tiles (instead of being calcualted globally), so they form a distribution
and enable the calculation of a confidence interval to better compare the results.
Per tile ABO = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
max
j
IoU(gi, pj)
(2.10)
Per tile WABO =
∑N
i=1 |gi| · maxj IoU(gi, pj)
∑N
i=1 |gi|
(2.11)
Inspired by SortedAP: Rethinking evaluation metrics for instance segmentation[28], some
results will also include other match­based metrics such as precision and recall for a given
IoU threshold. The article also suggests metrics such as Panoptic Quality (PQ) that bal­
ance precision and recall, but since SAM by definition segments anything, a low precision
is expected. Such metrics are therefore not included in this thesis, as the objective is not
nessecarily to balance precision and recall. Instead, a high recall may be preferred, while
both precision and recall help in understanding the segmentation results.
All confidence intervals are calculated using bootstrapping, where a distribution is com­
puted as the means of 10.000 samplings with replacement of the same size as the number
of measurements. The confidence interval is then the range between the 2.5% and 97.5%
percentiles.
Data splitting
During both SAM fine­tuning and probe training (for classification), images from area A
were used for training and images from area B were used for testing. The DENETHOR
dataset is very convenient in that the two sets of images then differ in both spatial (location)
and temporal dimensions (2018 and 2019).
12
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Classification
In this thesis, the classification has the two following objectives. Classifying segments
as either crop fields or non­crop fields and classifying crop field segments by their type.
The segments to be classified are the segments from the point­grid segmentation in Sec­
tion 4.1. To ensure purity in the segments, they are categorized according to the rules
in Table 2.3, which state that a segment must overlap at least 80% with a single ground
truth field, and no other crop type may cover more than 5% of the segment for it to be
categorized as a crop field. Similarly, segments must not overlap more than 20% with the
combined ground truth fields to be categorized as Not a crop field. That leaves a remain­
der of segments, unmatched, that are not used in the classification. The counts for each
segment category are shown in Table 2.4, while the counts for each crop type for the crop
field segments are shown in Table 2.5.
Category
Definition
Crop field
≥80% overlap with one ground truth field and no other crop covering ≥5%
Not a crop field
<20% overlap with all ground truth fields combined
Table 2.3: Categories for predicted masks based on overlap with ground truth crop fields.
Area
Crop field
Not crop field
Unmatched
A
53.946
129.312
46.133
B
30.539
118.407
28.071
Table 2.4: Counts of predicted masks
as ”crop field”, ”not crop field” or
”unmatched”.
Crop type
Area A
Area B
Wheat
9.575
4.894
Corn
9.518
4.227
Rye
8.717
5.731
Oil Seeds
8.193
3.532
Meadows
6.499
4.173
Barley
5.017
4.040
Forage Crops
5.017
3.210
Oats
1.054
676
Root Crops
356
56
Total crop field
53.946
30.539
Table 2.5: Crop type distribution of predicted
masks.
2.3.1
CLIP
This thesis used the ViT­L/14@336px CLIP model, which is based on a transformer ar­
chitecture similar to the image encoder in SAM[13]. It predicts scores for how similar an
image is to a set of text prompts (e.g. ”cat” and ”dog”). It is a pretrained model trained
on ”400 million (image, text) pairs collected from a variety of publicly available sources
on the Internet”[13]. It consists of an image encoder and a text encoder that are ”jointly
trained to maximize the cosine similarity of the image and text embeddings”[13] to predict
a matching pair.
The prompt­based approach was briefly tested on pairs of crops of ground truth masks and
crops of the same size from areas with no ground truth masks. As shown in Figure 7.4,
the prompt­based approach showed poor results compared to a linear probe on the image
embeddings from CLIP. Therefore, this thesis did not use the prompt­based approach for
segment classification.
CLIP’s image embeddings were extracted for three types of images for each segment, as
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
13
==PAGE:20==
shown in Figure 2.8. A raw full­tile image as a baseline, the same full­tile image with a red
outline around the segment and a cropped and masked image based on the segment.
(a) Raw image (Base­
line)
(b) Outlined segment
(c)
Masked
seg­
ment
Figure 2.8: Examples of the image types used for the CLIP model
The method of using a red outline around the object is inspired by ”Visual and Text Prompt
Segmentation: A Novel Multi­Model Framework for Remote Sensing”[30], which used it
to help CLIP focus on the correct area. For this thesis, it may help CLIP focus on the
relevant area while still providing more context compared to the masked image. Since
crop fields of the same class often appear in the same area and the model may predict
based on a majority, the baseline image is used to measure the exact impact of using the
outline around segment.
2.3.2
Feature sets
The classification is based on five different sets of features, as shown in Table 2.6. Three
of the sets use the embeddings of the segments from the CLIP model. CLIP–baseline
uses the embeddings of the raw tile (as shown in 2.8a), CLIP–outlined uses the embed­
dings of the tile with the outlined segment (as shown in 2.8b) and CLIP–masked uses the
embeddings of the masked segment (as shown in 2.8c).
Feature Set
Composition
CLIP–baseline
CLIP embedding from raw image
CLIP–outlined
CLIP embedding with prediction outline overlay
CLIP–masked
CLIP embedding from masked prediction
Spectral–single
Band statistics, HSV, spectral indices, GLCM textures
Spectral–seasonal
Same as Spectral–single, but aggregated across months
Table 2.6: Feature sets used for classification. Single uses one predicted segment and
Seasonal aggregates features across months.
The two spectral feature sets are inspired by Yang (2020)[11], who also uses Sentinel­2
images for crop field classification. They focused on per­pixel classification, while this
thesis focused on segment classification. They combined raw band and HSI values, the
vegetation indices listed in Table 7.3, the GLCM texture features listed in Table 7.4 and
segmentation features, all as temporal features based on satellite images from three dif­
ferent dates.
The Spectral–single feature set included raw band values (mean, standard deviation and
HSI across all spectral bands) and the same vegetation indices and GLCM texture fea­
tures as the article [11]. For the Sentinel­2 images, this resulted in 12 bands with two raw
14
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:21==
band features (mean and standard deviation), three HSI features, 15 vegetation index
features and four texture features.
The Spectral–seasonal feature set used the same base features as Spectral–single, but
aggregated them by month from April to September, using the same segmentation mask
across up to two random images from each month. The Spectral–seasonal feature set
was therefore six times larger than Spectral–single.
The texture features are calculated based on the GLCM matrix [31]. The GLCM matrix
depends on a displacement vector that defines which pixels to compare. In this thesis,
the pixel distance was two and the angle was 0 and π/2, meaning that all pixel pairs with
a horizontal and vertical distance of two were compared. The GLCM matrix is computed
based on the grayscale values of the RGB tiles. It is an L × L matrix, where L is the
number of different grayscale values. An example of the unnormalized GLCM matrix with
a distance of 1 and an angle of π/4 (down to the right) for a grayscale image is shown
in Figure 2.9. For each row and column value (0, 1 and 2) in the GLCM matrix, a count
is computed for the image based on all pixel pairs. For instance, (0, 1) = 1 in the GLCM
matrix means that there is one occurrence of a 0­1 pair in the image, where the 1 is
positioned down to the right of the 0 (red). Similarly, (2, 2) = 2 in the GLCM matrix means
that there are two occurrences of a 2­2 pair in the image, found along the diagonal (blue).
I =


2
1
2
0
2
1
0
1
2


(a) Example 3 × 3 grayscale image
GLCM =


0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
2


(b) GLCM (unnormalized)
Figure 2.9: Example of a 3 × 3 grayscale image and its GLCM for distance 1 and angle
π/4 (down to the right)
The final GLCM matrix is normalized (probabilistic), and its distribution of values affects
the measurements. For instance, high numbers along the diagonal indicate neighbors
with similar values and therefore high homogeneity, while a random distribution indicates
high entropy[32].
The Spectral–single and Spectral–seasonal feature sets were explored in latent feature
spaces using PCA and t­SNE in Section 4.2. PCA finds the orthogonal axes that capture
the most variance in the data, in descending order. t­SNE initializes all points in the low di­
mensional space at random positions[33]. The pair­wise similarity (in both directions) be­
tween all points in low and high­dimensional spaces is computed using Gaussian kernels
centered at each point. The variance of each kernel is based on the perplexity parameter
(this thesis used perplexity = 30) and the local point density at each point (low density,
large variance). The points in the low dimensional space are then iteratively repositioned
to minimize the difference between the similarities in low and high dimensional space[33].
2.3.3
Probe models
Three models were used for the two classification objectives. Two of the models are
based on logistic regression, where one uses cross­entropy and the other uses focal loss
as the loss function. The third model is XGBoost, which is a boosting ensemble model.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
15
==PAGE:22==
Logistic regression
The prediction of a linear logistic regression model is given in Equation 2.12, where σ(z)
is the sigmoid function, and the loss function is given in Equation 2.13 (cross­entropy) for
the binary case.[34]
ˆyi = σ(zi) =
1
1 + e−zi ,
zi = ˜xi⊤w
(2.12)
E(w) = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
[yi log ˆyi + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi)]
(2.13)
So, the model tries to maximize log ˆyi for observations where yi = 1 and log(1 −ˆyi) for
observations where yi = 0. Scikit’s LogisticRegression adds the regularization term[35],
r(w), as shown in Equation 2.14.
Etotal(w) = E(w) + r(w)
SC
(2.14)
Here, S is the sum of weights for each observation and C is the regularization strength,
meaning smaller C leads to larger regularization. In this thesis, all observations are as­
signed equal weights. The regularization term can be the l1 norm, ∥w∥1, the l2 norm,
1
2∥w∥2
2 or ElasticNet, 1−ρ
2 ∥w∥2
2 + ρ∥w∥1, which combines the l1 and l2 norms based on a
ratio ρ between 0 (only l2) and 1 (only l1)[35].
If the observations belong to more than two classes, Scikit’s LogisticRegression uses soft­
max as given in Equation 2.15, where K is the number of classes[35]. This changes the
loss function to sum over yik log ˆyik for all classes instead of only the two binary classes.
ˆyik =
ex⊤
i wk
∑K
j=1 ex⊤
i wj ,
k = 1, . . . , K
(2.15)
Logistic regression with focal loss
The loss function for focal loss, as shown in Equation 2.16, extends the cross entropy
loss function in Equation 2.13 with the term (1 −ˆyi)γ for observations where yi = 1 and
ˆyγ
i for observations where yi = 0[36]. It reduces the loss for incorrect predictions with a
magnitude affected by γ, where γ = 0 applies no focal loss and a larger γ decreases the
focal loss term, (1 −ˆyi)γ.
Efocal(w) = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
[(1 −ˆyi)γyi log(ˆyi) + ˆyγ
i (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi)]
(2.16)
The effect of the focal loss term is that the loss for slightly incorrect predictions, like ˆyi =
0.95 for yi = 1 and varying γ (e.g. (1−0.95)0.5 = 0.22, (1−0.95)1 = 0.05 and (1−0.95)2 =
0.0025), is extremely minimized, while the loss for very incorrect predictions, like ˆyi = 0.05
for yi = 1 and varying γ (e.g. (1−0.05)0.5 = 0.97, (1−0.05)1 = 0.95 and (1−0.05)2 = 0.9)
remains relatively high. So while focal loss decreases the loss for all incorrect predictions
(if γ > 0), slightly incorrect predictions are affected (and minimized) the most and therefore
very incorrect predictions have a relatively higher effect on total loss. This effect increases
as γ increases.
16
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:23==
XGBoost
XGBoost is an ensemble method like AdaBoost. AdaBoost computes smaller trees (often
stumps) iteratively and increases the weights of the misclassified samples in each iteration
to give them more influence in the loss function to reduce both variance and bias[34].
XGBoost is similar to AdaBoost in the sense that it iteratively computes a sequence of
small decision trees that focus on the errors of the previous ones. Unlike AdaBoost, the
individual trees in XGBoost are not weighted. Instead, the prediction is the sum of the pre­
dictions of all trees (CARTs), Equation 2.17, applied to a softmax or sigmoid function[37].
ˆyi = ϕ(xi) =
K
∑
k=1
fk(xi),
fk ∈F,
(2.17)
The loss function for XGBoost is shown in Equation 2.18, where Ω(ft) is the regularization
term, T is the number of leaves (end nodes), ft(xi) is the prediction of the new tree and
l
(
yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
is the loss for the prediction of the previous trees[37]. Since l
(
yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
is
static (not affected by the new tree ft(xi)), it is not relevant for the optimization. Instead,
the optimization depends on gi and hi, the first and second order gradients of the previ­
ous loss. If l
(
yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
is omitted from Equation 2.18, the remaining part is expected to
become negative, lowering the entire loss, when the model improves.
L(t) ≈
n
∑
i=1
[
l
(
yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
+ gi ft(xi) + 1
2 hi f2
t (xi)
]
+ Ω(ft),
where
gi = ∂l(yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
∂ˆy(t−1)
i
,
hi = ∂2l(yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
)
∂(ˆy(t−1)
i
)2
,
Ω(ft) = γT + 1
2λ∥w∥2
(2.18)
Decision trees normally predict discretely to one class. But since XGBoost uses the gradi­
ent of the loss from the previous trees, its decision trees predict a continuous value based
on the leaves’ weights, which are computed during optimization. The gradient is also re­
ferred to as the residuals (or pseudo­residuals)[38]. So, each new tree fits the residuals of
the previous trees, influenced by the regularization term, where γ penalizes the number
of leaves in a tree and α and λ penalize the size of the leaves’ weights using the l1 and
l2 norm respectively. Though α is not a part of the regularization term in Equation 2.18, it
is included in the implementation.
2.3.4
Evaluation
Similar to the SAM fine­tuning, the segments from area A were used for training and
the segments from area B were used for testing, so the training and test sets differ in
both location and time. Two­fold cross­validation was used to select the best parameters
among the tested parameters listed in Table 2.7. The data was standardized, subtracted
by the mean and divided by the standard deviation, in each fold and for the final fit.
ElasticNet was used as regularization for logistic regression with varying values of ρ, in­
cluding ρ = 0 and ρ = 1 (pure l2 and l1). Focal loss for logistic regression was imple­
mented as a simple linear single­layer NN with focal loss [39], weight decay and early
stopping. XGBoost used varying values for regularization (α, λ and γ) but relied heavily
on early stopping to avoid overfitting. After cross­validation, the early stopping round was
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
17
==PAGE:24==
determined using 20% of the area A data for validation, and the final model was trained
on all data from area A.
Parameter
Values
solver
saga
penalty
elasticnet
ρ
0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1
C
10−3, 10−2, 10−1
Logistic Regression
Parameter
Values
learning rate
10−3, 10−4
weight decay
10−5, 10−4, 10−3
gamma
0.5, 1.0, 1.5
early stopping
5
Focal Logistic Regression
Parameter
Values
max depth
3, 4, 5
learning rate
0.05, 0.1
subsample
0.8
colsample
0.8
early stopping
5
alpha
0.1, 0.5, 1
lambda
0.1, 0.5, 1
gamma
0, 1, 2
XGBoost
Table 2.7: Overview of hyperparameter grids for Logistic Regression, Focal Logistic
Regression and XGBoost
As mentioned, each satellite image was divided into 10x10 possible non­overlapping tiles.
Each tile was given a tile index from 1 to 100 to identify which area it covers. During
cross­validation, the tile indices were used to ensure that a tile area appeared in either
the training or validation set, but never in both. This was done to prevent leakage, as the
satellite images form a time series and therefore share similarities. Without it, the mod­
els tended to overfit during cross­validation, resulting in low validation error and minimal
regularization selected. It is the reason for the low number of folds in the cross­validation,
as each set should include all nine classes, and no data from area A was reserved for
testing. Therefore, the results in Table 7.5, 7.6, 7.9 and 7.10 are the best results from the
cross­validation, and they may be overoptimistic.
The models’ performance was evaluated based on accuracy, average recall and per­crop
recall.
2.4
Explainability with SHAP
Shapley values indicate how much a feature contributes to a sample’s prediction. They
can be computed by retraining a model on all possible feature subsets, measuring the
impact of including each feature (Shapley regression values)[40], or by sampling feature
subsets and approximating the impact by swapping a sample’s feature value with those
of other samples (Shapley sampling values)[40]. Equation 2.19 show how the shapley
values linearly contribute to a samples expected prediction, g(x′)[40].
g(x′) = ϕ0 +
M
∑
i=1
ϕix′
i
(2.19)
The SHAP library uses background samples to estimate how a model behaves and eval­
uation samples for interpretation. The best performing classification model for Sentinel­2,
XGBClassifier, was evaluated using SHAP. The number of background and evaluation
samples used for the SHAP evaluation is shown in Table 2.8, while Table 2.9 shows the
predicted crop type distribution for the evaluation samples. To have at least 10 samples
predicted for each crop type, the number of evaluation samples was set higher than the
documentation suggests.
18
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:25==
Subset
Samples
Background
2.000
Evaluation
2.000
Table 2.8: SHAP background and evalua­
tion sizes.
Crop type
Samples
Wheat
364
Rye
332
Barley
189
Oats
44
Corn
359
Oil Seeds
300
Root Crops
10
Meadows
243
Forage Crops
159
Table 2.9:
Evaluation samples per pre­
dicted class.
The evaluation was primarily based on computing the absolute mean Shapley values
across features grouped by month and type. When evaluating how the model predicts a
single crop type (e.g., as shown in Table 4.18 and Figure 4.24a and 4.24b), the samples
were grouped by their predicted class and evaluated using the mean Shapley values for
the same class.
2.5
Active Learning
This thesis used scikit­activeml for uncertainty sampling based on entropy to estimate how
many labeled samples are required to obtain a classifier with approximately the same ac­
curacy as when trained on the entire dataset. The library implements uncertainty sampling
based on the paper Active Learning Literature Survey[41]. It uses the entropy formula
given in 2.20, which selects the sample with the highest entropy (uncertainty). Pθ(yi | x)
is the probability of x belonging to each of the nine crop types, used as a weighting term,
and log Pθ(yi | x) quantifies the information for x belonging to each of the crop types. The
maximal entropy is obtained when Pθ(yi | x) is equal for all i, meaning when when the
model is most uncertain about the the prediction for a sample.
x∗
H = arg max
x
(
−
∑
i
Pθ(yi | x) log Pθ(yi | x)
)
, [41]
(2.20)
Active learning (uncertainty sampling) was performed on the best performing model con­
figuration for crop classification for Sentinel­2, XGBoost. The model was initially trained
on a pool that contained a random sample of each crop type. Iteratively, the models were
retrained on the pool of samples, where a single new sample with the highest entropy was
added. For comparison, the same model was also iteratively trained on a pool, where a
random sample was added once at a time.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
19
==PAGE:26==
3
Data description
This thesis uses the DENETHOR dataset[42], which consists of satellite images from
Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion for two areas in Germany as shown in Figure 3.1. As shown
in Table 3.1, the Sentinel­2 images have 12 bands in different resolutions. The bands with
the highest resolution of 10 m/px are the blue, green, red ,and NIR bands. For comparison,
PlanetFusion has only four bands per image, but with a higher spatial resolution of 3 m/px.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the two areas in Germany. Area A (blue) is the 2018 region
used for training and area B (green) is the 2019 region used for testing.
The band value histograms are shown in Figure 7.1. The plots are clipped to 0 to 5.000
as almost no pixels have values above 5.000 for any band. The histograms show that the
color bands (blue, green, and red) generally have lower values (peaking in the 0 to 1.000
range) and in a smaller range than most of the other bands and the near­infrared bands,
which peak in the 2.000 to 3.000 range.
Band (Name)
Resolution (m/px)
λ (nm)
B01 (Aerosol)
60
443
B02 (Blue)
10
490
B03 (Green)
10
560
B04 (Red)
10
665
B05 (RE)
20
705
B06 (RE)
20
740
B07 (RE)
20
783
B08 (VNIR)
10
842
B8A (RE)
20
865
B09 (W. vapour)
60
945
B10 (Cirrus)
60
1375
B11 (SWIR 1)
20
1610
B12 (SWIR 2)
20
2190
Table 3.1: Sentinel­2 band
specifications from Sentinel Hub[43].
Band
Resolution (m/px)
λ (nm)
Blue
3
450–510
Green
3
530–590
Red
3
640–670
NIR
3
850–880
Table 3.2: Planet Fusion band
specifications[44].
The PlanetFusion images are preprocessed for cloud removal and constructed using both
Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion images, and it is the more expensive product of the two. The
Sentinel­2 images, on the other hand, are not preprocessed for cloud removal (as shown
in Figure 3.2), and most images are either partly or fully clouded.
20
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:27==
(a) Clear
(b) Partly clouded
(c) Fully clouded
Figure 3.2: Sentinel­2 examples illustrating cloud conditions: clear, partly clouded, and
fully clouded.
The crop types are self­reported by the farmers[42], and the count of each type is shown
in Table 3.3. It shows a similar distribution for the two areas, with the highest count for
meadows and the lowest count for root crops.
Crop type
Area A
Area B
Wheat
305
212
Rye
279
259
Barley
137
182
Oats
45
40
Corn
251
154
Oil Seeds
201
109
Root Crops
23
15
Meadows
954
742
Forage Crops
339
351
Table 3.3: Crop field count by type in the two areas.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
21
==PAGE:28==
4
Results
4.1
Segmentation with SAM
This section covers the results of the SAM segmentation. The first part presents the
exploration of the effects of hyperparameters and bands on the grid segmentation, which
was used to select the hyperparameters and bands for the comparison of Sentinel­2 and
PlanetFusion presented in the second part. The third and fourth parts present the results
of super­resolution tiles and the fine­tuning models.
4.1.1
Hyper­parameter and band exploration
To identify suitable hyperparameter values for SAM segmentation, each hyperparameter
value is plotted against its relevant metrics. Figure 4.1a shows that as points per side
increases, so does the weighted ABO, indicating better segmentation performance. The
same figure shows that this comes with the cost of increasing inference time due to the
increasing number of point prompts to be processed. The overall effect of increasing
points per side seems to taper off for both sources and areas around the value 32.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: Comparison of how points_per_side (A) and pred_iou_thresh (B) affect
WABO, inference time and mask count.
Figure 4.1b shows that as pred_iou_thresh decreases, the number of predictions in­
creases. The thresholded IoU score is SAM’s predicted IoU. As the threshold is lowered,
fewer predictions are removed. Figure 4.2a shows that both the weighted ABO and the
precision (at 80% IoU) increase as pred_iou_thresh decreases, and both taper off around
0.8 for both sources and areas.
Figure 4.2b shows that as points_per_batch increases, the average inference time per
image decreases. The effect seems to stabilize after 64 points per batch for Sentinel­2
and 128 points per batch for PlanetFusion. It is unexpected that PlanetFusion benefits
more from a higher value for batch size than Sentinel­2, considering its larger image
size. One could expect that the GPU’s memory limit is reached with fewer point prompts
for PlanetFusion compared to Sentinel­2. One reason could be that as the batch size
22
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:29==
increases, the bottleneck shifts to pure computations, and that bottleneck is reached with
a smaller batch size for Sentinel­2. The figure, more expectedly, shows that the inference
time for Sentinel­2 is generally lower than PlanetFusion due to the lower resolution per
tile, and the weighted ABO is unaffected by the batch size, confirming that it doesn’t affect
the predictions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Comparison of how pred_iou_thresh (A) and points_per_batch (B) affect
WABO, recall and inference time.
Similar to pred_iou_thresh, Figure 4.3a and 4.3b show that as stability_score_thresh de­
creases, the weighted ABO and the precision (at 80% IoU) increase. It follows the same
logic as for pred_iou_thresh, fewer predictions are removed. The effect of lowering sta­
bility_score_thresh tapers off around 0.8 for both sources and regions. The flat­lining pre­
cision indicates that lowering the threshold does not come at the cost of relatively more
non­crop predictions being included.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Comparison of how stability_score_thresh affects WABO, mask count
and precision
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4a shows that as box_nms_thresh decreases, the avg. number of predictions
also decreases. The box_nms_thresh is, again, the threshold for the allowed bounding
box overlap. If the bounding box overlap for two predictions is higher than the threshold,
the prediction with the lowest predicted IoU is removed.
Figure 4.4b shows that as box_nms_thresh decreases, so does the weighted ABO. Inter­
estingly, the decrease from 0.9 to 0.4 for box_nms_thresh leads to a fairly small decrease
in the weighted ABO. A similar effect is shown for the precision (at 80% IoU), which, as
box_nms_thresh decreases, increases and peaks at 0.3 box_nms_thresh before it de­
creases as box_nms_thresh approaches 0.1. Both the weighted ABO and the precision
(at 80% IoU) indicate that the box_nms_thresh can be lowered to around 0.4, reducing
the number of overlapping predictions without heavily decreasing the performance of the
segmentation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Comparison of how box_nms_thresh affects WABO, mask count and
precision.
Figure 4.5a and 4.5b show the same trend for area_nms_thresh as for box_nms_thresh,
but as area_nms_thresh is lowered, it has a much smaller effect on the weighted ABO,
and the precision (at 80% IoU) keeps increasing and peaks at 0.1 area_nms_thresh. This
indicates that area_nms_thresh can very efficiently remove overlapping predictions and
increase the precision at a very low cost to the weighted ABO. If area_nms_thresh is
used, a reasonable value could be 0.2, as it only decreases the weighted ABO by a few
percentage points.
24
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Comparison of how area_nms_thresh affects WABO, mask count and
precision.
Figure 4.6a shows the weighted ABO and recall for varying clipping max values. It shows
small peak in the weighted ABO and recall for a clipping max value of 2500, likely indi­
cating that as the clipping max value is lowered, the increase in contrast improves the
segmentation, but only until it becomes so low that information in the pixel values is lost.
Figure 4.6a shows that the segmentation does not benefit from gamma adjustment, as
the weighted ABO peaks at a gamma of 1.0.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Comparison of how clipping and gamma affect WABO and recall.
The results of the single­band segmentation are shown in Table 7.1. They show that, in
general, the color bands (2, 3, and 4 for Sentinel­2 and 1, ,2, and 3 for PlanetFusion)
perform best when measured in ABO and weighted ABO. The only exceptions are the
near­infrared band for Sentinel­2 (band 8) in area B and the near­infrared band for Plan­
etFusion (band 4) in area B.
Figure 4.7 shows two tiles from PlanetFusion and their corresponding ground truth in­
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
25
==PAGE:32==
stances. The colors do not indicate crop type, only different instances. The first tile (a +
b) covers an area with 41 mostly larger crop fields with clear outlines, while the second
tile (c + d) covers an area with 45 mostly smaller crop fields that are difficult to distinguish,
especially the meadows in the upper right corner of image (d).
Figure 4.8 and 4.9 show the predicted instances for the two tiles in Figure 4.7 for vary­
ing values of pred_iou_thresh and stability_score_thresh, along with the performance in
ABO, weighted ABO and prediction count. In the examples, pred_iou_thresh and stabil­
ity_score_thresh are set to the same values of 0, 0.3, 0.6 and 09. Since both parameters
reflect the quality of the predictions, varying just one hyperparameter at a time could give
a false impression of how they affect the predictions. In all examples, box_nms_thresh is
set to 0.4, allowing a bounding box IoU for predictions of up to 40%.
(a) Raw
(b) GT instances
(c) Raw
(d) GT instances
Figure 4.7: Raw PlanetFusion tiles and corresponding ground truth instance overlays.
Figure 4.8 and 4.9 show that even though box_nms_thresh is fixed at 0.4, allowing only
a small IoU between predictions, the two hyperparameters pred_iou_thresh and stabil­
ity_score_thresh still greatly affect the number of predictions, varying from 96 to 46 in
the first example and from 189 to 38 in the second example. This is important, as a low
box_nms_thresh can give the impression that predictions do not overlap and increase in
numbers when other hyperparameters change, but they do, since the IoU between a large
mask and a small mask is low even if the small mask completely overlaps the large one.
(a) 0.0
(b) 0.3
(c) 0.6
(d) 0.9
96 preds
ABO = 0.68
WABO = 0.82
69 preds
ABO = 0.65
WABO = 0.82
52 preds
ABO = 0.65
WABO = 0.82
46 preds
ABO = 0.61
WABO = 0.81
Figure 4.8: Predicted instances at increasing pred_iou_thresh and stability_score_thresh
values (0–0.9).
Each image shows the number of predictions, average best­overlap
(ABO), and weighted ABO (WABO).
26
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:33==
(a) 0.0
(b) 0.3
(c) 0.6
(d) 0.9
189 preds
ABO = 0.26
WABO = 0.48
121 preds
ABO = 0.23
WABO = 0.47
85 preds
ABO = 0.20
WABO = 0.41
38 preds
ABO = 0.13
WABO = 0.26
Figure 4.9: Predicted instances at increasing pred_iou_thresh and
stability_score_thresh values (0–0.9). Each image shows the number of predictions,
average best­overlap (ABO), and weighted ABO (WABO).
In the first example with large crop fields, Figure 4.8 shows that even though the number of
predictions drops from 96 to 46 as pred_iou_thresh and stability_score_thresh increase,
the performance in ABO and weighted ABO remains the same, while the segmentation
visually becomes less noisy and better aligns with the ground truth instances in Figure
4.7.
In the second example with small crop fields, Figure 4.9 shows that ABO and weighted
ABO are greatly affected by the changes in pred_iou_thresh and stability_score_thresh,
and it visually shows more small predictions for low values of these hyperparameters. This
indicates that lowering pred_iou_thresh and stability_score_thresh increases the number
of smaller predictions that may coincidentally overlap with the ground truth instances and
inflate the performance measures.
Figure 4.10 shows an example of the segmentation of a tile, illustrating how SAM’s predic­
tions and the visual appearance do not always align with the ground truth. For instance,
the green ground truth instance in the middle of Figure 4.10b covers what visually could be
interpreted as two or three distinct crop fields. SAM predicts three instances for the same
area. The predictions with an IoU of at least 0.8 with a ground truth mask are shown in
Figure 4.10d. This illustrates how SAM can produce reasonable predictions, even though
the overall segmentation result for the tile is only 0.43 ABO and 0.68 weighted ABO.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Raw image
(b) Ground truth
(c) Predictions
(d) Pred (IoU > 0.8)
Figure 4.10: Example of SAM segmentation showing (a) raw tile image, (b) ground truth
masks, (c) predicted masks, and (d) the prediction that matches the ground truth with an
IoU > 0.8. The model produced 48 predicted masks for 40 ground truth masks, with an
ABO of 0.43 and a weighted ABO of 0.68.
4.1.2
General performance
The point­grid segmentation results for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion across the two areas
for the selected hyperparameters (shown in Table 2.1) are shown in Table 4.1. Sentinel­2
performs slightly better across both regions, but since the confidence intervals for both
ABO and weighted ABO overlap, the difference is not statistically significant. PlanetFusion
performs slightly better in precision and recall at the higher IoU thresholds (e.g. PS­B has
a recall of 0.140 at 0.9 IoU threshold compared to 0.116 for S2­B), though overall the two
sources perform fairly similarly. The point­grid segmentation results using SAM’s default
hyperparameters are shown in Table 7.2. Here, PlanetFusion performs slightly better
than Sentinel­2 for area B based on both ABO and weighted ABO, while Sentinel­2 still
outperforms PlanetFusion for area A.
Source
Area
ABO
Weighted ABO
Avg. pred
S2
A
0.468 ± 0.005
0.643 ± 0.006
61.4
S2
B
0.403 ± 0.008
0.544 ± 0.010
59.3
PS
A
0.466 ± 0.005
0.633 ± 0.006
61.7
PS
B
0.402 ± 0.008
0.540 ± 0.010
61.1
Source
@IoU
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
S2­A
Precision
0.251
0.224
0.194
0.155
0.082
Recall
0.463
0.413
0.357
0.285
0.151
S2­B
Precision
0.191
0.169
0.146
0.113
0.055
Recall
0.404
0.359
0.310
0.241
0.116
PS­A
Precision
0.248
0.223
0.196
0.162
0.098
Recall
0.465
0.418
0.367
0.303
0.183
PS­B
Precision
0.184
0.165
0.145
0.116
0.063
Recall
0.411
0.369
0.323
0.260
0.140
Table 4.1: Segmentation evaluation for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion for both areas using
point­grid segmentation. Per­image ABO, weighted per­image ABO, average
predictions and average ground­truth crop fields per image. Bottom table shows
precision and recall at IoU thresholds.
The single­point segmentation results for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion across the two
areas are shown in Table 4.2.
Here, PlanetFusion performs significantly better than
28
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:35==
Sentinel­2 measured in IoU against the ground truth instances.
Notable, SAM’s IoU
scores are on average lower for PlanetFusion compared to Sentinel­2, likely explaining
why PlanetFusion performs worse compared to Sentinel­2 in the point­grid segmenta­
tion (Table 4.1), as the point­grid segmentation is based on thresholding this parameters
among others. Their density plots can be found in Section 7.4.
Source
Area
IoU
IoU score
Stability
S2
A
0.508 ± 0.0046
0.850 ± 0.0029
0.730 ± 0.0035
S2
B
0.434 ± 0.0081
0.742 ± 0.0104
0.636 ± 0.0096
PS
A
0.607 ± 0.0044
0.788 ± 0.0029
0.771 ± 0.0030
PS
B
0.517 ± 0.0086
0.686 ± 0.0095
0.668 ± 0.0094
Table 4.2: IoU, IoU score and stability per source and area using SAM2­ImagePredictor.
Figure 4.11 shows the ABO performance for each crop type for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFu­
sion across the two ares based on the point­grid segmentation. It shows that the average
ABO for wheat, rye, barley, oats, corn and oil seeds is between 0,5 and 0,7, while the
average ABO for root crops, meadows and forage crops is much lower between 0,2 and
0,4.
Figure 4.11: ABO by crop type across all sources, showing per­crop performance for
S2­A, S2­B, PS­A and PS­B.
Figure 4.12a and 4.12b show the seasonal effect on ABO. The segmentation performance
for area A peaks for the July tiles, while segmentation performance for area B peaks for
the August tiles. Figure 4.12b shows that the effect depends greatly on the crop type.
Most crop types peak in performance during the spring or summer, with oil seeds and
corn peaking in May, while barley peaks in July, likely aligning with their growing and
flowering seasons.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
29
==PAGE:36==
(a) Seasonal weighted ABO and image count
across months for both sources and areas.
(b) ABO by month averaged across both
sources and areas, showing the crop types’
seasonal performance.
Figure 4.12: Seasonal performance across sources, areas and crop types.
4.1.3
Super­resolution
Satlas Super Resolution
Figure 4.13 shows examples of Satlas Super Resolution Sentinel­2 upscaled tiles. The
upscaling is based on either 1, 2, 4, 8 and 16 tiles of the same location. The top row shows
upscaled tiles without blending and the bottom row shows upscaled tiles with blending
(cropping with overlap and cosine­weighted merging). It shows how the tiles upscaled
without blending have visible edges where the upscaled pieces are stitched together,
giving it a chessboard look.
(a) Satlas upscaled predictions without blending (1, 2, 4, 8 and 16 images).
(b) Satlas upscaled predictions with blending (1, 2, 4, 8 and 16 images).
Figure 4.13: Examples of Satlas super­resolution predictions on Sentinel­2 region S2­A,
comparing blending and non­blending approaches.
Table 4.3 shows the single­point segmentation for Sentinel­2 in area A. It shows that as
Satlas Super Resolution combines more images per upscale, the performance measured
in IoU against the ground truth instances increases. Similarly, SAM’s stability and IoU
scores also increase as more images are used per upscale.
The results also show that tiles upscaled using blending in all cases perform better than
those not using blending. Overall, none of the methods for upscaling using Satlas Super
30
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:37==
Resolution outperform the baseline of raw tiles, though the baseline and Satlas (16 im­
ages, blend) have overlapping confidence intervals, indicating that their performance is
not statistically different.
Method
Area
IoU
IoU Score
Stability
Baseline
S2­A
0.508 ± 0.005
0.850 ± 0.003
0.730 ± 0.004
Satlas (1 image, blend)
S2­A
0.419 ± 0.014
0.833 ± 0.009
0.640 ± 0.014
Satlas (2 images, blend)
S2­A
0.465 ± 0.014
0.841 ± 0.011
0.694 ± 0.013
Satlas (4 images, blend)
S2­A
0.462 ± 0.014
0.834 ± 0.009
0.655 ± 0.013
Satlas (8 images, blend)
S2­A
0.491 ± 0.014
0.849 ± 0.011
0.720 ± 0.012
Satlas (16 images, blend)
S2­A
0.504 ± 0.010
0.852 ± 0.010
0.730 ± 0.011
Satlas (1 image, no blend)
S2­A
0.378 ± 0.012
0.807 ± 0.013
0.658 ± 0.013
Satlas (2 images, no blend)
S2­A
0.378 ± 0.014
0.841 ± 0.011
0.694 ± 0.013
Satlas (4 images, no blend)
S2­A
0.408 ± 0.011
0.818 ± 0.007
0.657 ± 0.010
Satlas (8 images, no blend)
S2­A
0.420 ± 0.010
0.826 ± 0.009
0.710 ± 0.010
Satlas (16 images, no blend)
S2­A
0.431 ± 0.011
0.833 ± 0.006
0.719 ± 0.009
Table 4.3: Satlas super­resolution results using different numbers of overlapping images
on Sentinel­2 region S2­A, with and without blending.
Figure 4.14 and 4.15 show examples of predictions for tiles upscaled using blending (Fig­
ure 4.15) and not using blending (Figure 4.14), illustrating how the edges where the crops
are stitched together affect the predictions. In Figure 4.14, the predictions align with the
cropped parts of the images, while in Figure 4.15, the predictions are not affected by the
stitching.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.14: Examples of predictions for the Satlas Super Resolution images without
blending based on single raw images (a and b) and 16 raw images (c and d).
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
31
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.15: Examples of predictions for the Satlas Super Resolution images with
blending based on eight raw images (a and b) and 16 raw images (c and d).
CompVis’s LDM­SR
Figure 4.16 shows the effect of increasing the number of inference (denoising) steps when
upscaling tiles using LDM­SR on the single­point segmentation. The figure shows that
as the number of inference steps increases, the IoU with the ground truth masks, SAM’s
stability and IoU score also increase. The effect seems to taper off at around six inference
steps.
Figure 4.16: Effect of denoising steps on the LDM­SR model for Sentinel­2 regions S2­A
and S2­B. Performance stabilizes after about 8–10 steps.
Figure 4.17 shows four example predictions based on the LDM­SR upscaled tiles, illus­
trating that SAM is capable of using the LDM­SR upscaled tiles for segmentation.
Figure 4.17: Example predictions for LDM­SR upscaled Sentinel­2 images.
The results of the LDM­SR upscaled tiles compared to the raw Sentinel­2 tiles are shown
in Table 4.4. They show that the baseline (raw Sentinel­2 tiles) performs slightly, yet statis­
32
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:39==
tically significantly better than the LDM­SR upscaled tiles with non­overlapping confidence
intervals for the IoU.
Method
Area
IoU
Score
Stability
Baseline
S2­A
0.51 ± 0.0046
0.85 ± 0.0029
0.73 ± 0.0035
S2­B
0.43 ± 0.0081
0.74 ± 0.0104
0.64 ± 0.0096
LDM­SR (10 steps)
S2­A
0.48 ± 0.0044
0.85 ± 0.0029
0.72 ± 0.0036
S2­B
0.41 ± 0.0079
0.75 ± 0.0105
0.64 ± 0.0097
Table 4.4: Results for LDM Super Resolution (10 inference steps) across Sentinel­2
regions (S2­A, S2­B) compared to the baseline.
4.1.4
Fine­tuning SAM
The single­point segmentation results of the fine­tuned models defined in Table 2.2, along
with the untrained model, are shown in Table 4.5. As mentioned, the models are trained
on area A and tested on area B for Sentinel­2. The results show that the Baseline model
performs best, with an IoU of 0.55 for area B compared to 0.43 for the untrained model.
With no overlapping confidence intervals, it also performs significantly better statistically
than any other model, while all fine­tuned models perform better than the untrained one.
Method
Source
IoU
Score
Stability
Untrained
S2­A
0.51 ± 0.0046
0.85 ± 0.0029
0.73 ± 0.0035
S2­B
0.43 ± 0.0081
0.74 ± 0.0104
0.64 ± 0.0096
Baseline
S2­A
0.66 ± 0.0040
0.72 ± 0.0037
0.73 ± 0.0031
S2­B
0.55 ± 0.0088
0.63 ± 0.0094
0.63 ± 0.0092
EncFrozen
S2­A
0.60 ± 0.0040
0.71 ± 0.0032
0.69 ± 0.0032
S2­B
0.52 ± 0.0084
0.62 ± 0.0091
0.60 ± 0.0089
ExcludeMRF
S2­A
0.64 ± 0.0045
0.76 ± 0.0032
0.74 ± 0.0032
S2­B
0.54 ± 0.0089
0.66 ± 0.0096
0.64 ± 0.0094
IoU50
S2­A
0.61 ± 0.0045
0.79 ± 0.0031
0.77 ± 0.0030
S2­B
0.52 ± 0.0088
0.69 ± 0.0099
0.67 ± 0.0097
IoU80
S2­A
0.58 ± 0.0047
0.84 ± 0.0029
0.81 ± 0.0030
S2­B
0.50 ± 0.0087
0.73 ± 0.0103
0.70 ± 0.0100
Table 4.5: Evaluation results for fine­tuning methods across Sentinel­2 regions (S2­A,
S2­B).
Figures 4.18a and 4.18b show the performance of the fine­tuned Baseline model for both
point­grid (with the previously selected hyperparameters) and single­point segmentation
over ten epochs. The Baseline model shows decreased performance for point­grid seg­
mentation, while it shows improved performance for single­point segmentation. A likely
reason is that the stability and IoU scores, which are used for thresholding in the point­grid
segmentation, drift toward lower values, as shown in Table 4.5.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
33
==PAGE:40==
(a) Performance of the baseline model with the
point­grid method (AMG).
(b) Performance of the baseline model with
the single­point method (IP).
4.2
Classification
Feature representation visualization
Figure 4.19 shows the Spectral–single and Spectral–seasonal feature sets plotted in PCA
and t­SNE space. The latent feature plots for Spectral–single show no clear class sepa­
ration, though individual classes are more dominant in some areas. The triangular shape
in Figure 4.19a reflects that most feature values are positive.
The PCA plot for Spectral–seasonal (Figure 4.19b) shows an almost complete separation
for corn, while other classes appear as clear but overlapping clusters. In the t­SNE plot for
Spectral–seasonal, oil seeds similarly show a complete separation from the other classes,
while meadows overlap with forage crops and wheat overlap with rye. Overall, the t­SNE
plot for Spectral–seasonal indicates that classification may be feasible for some of the
classes.
34
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:41==
(a) PCA of the Spectral–single features.
(b) PCA of the Spectral–seasonal features.
(c) t­SNE of the spectral–single features.
(d) t­SNE of the spectral–seasonal features.
Figure 4.19: Feature­space visualizations using PCA and t­SNE for Spectral–single and
Spectral–seasonal feature representations.
4.2.1
Crop field vs. not a crop field
This section presents the results of segment classification of crop field or not a crop field
using the three probes Logistic Regression, Focal Logistic Regression and XGBoost for
the five feature sets from each of the two sources (Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion). Addi­
tional results of the classification, including the best cross­validation scores and training
results, can be found in Section 7.9.
Table 4.6 and 4.7 show the test results for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion (area B), re­
spectively. In all cases, Spectral­seasonal provides significantly better results than any
other feature set, though the accuracy is generally only a few percentage points higher
than CLIP­outlined, CLIP­masked and Spectral­single. CLIP­outlined, CLIP­masked and
Spectral­single provide somewhat similar results, with accuracies between 86.5 and 90.3,
and some overlapping confidence intervals, such as between CLIP­masked and Spectral­
single for Logistic Regression and Focal Logistic Regression on PlanetFusion. CLIP­
baseline provides the worst performance of the feature sets. It achieves a fairly high
accuracy of around 80% but a low average recall. As shown in Figure 4.20, it achieves
the high accuracy by utulizing the class imbalance, classifying almost all segments as not
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
35
==PAGE:42==
a crop field.
For Spectral­seasonal of Sentinel­2, XGBoost performs best with an accuracy of 93.5%,
though the confidence intervals for XGBoost and Focal Logistic Regression overlap, mean­
ing the difference is not statistically significant. Similarly for Spectral­seasonal of Planet­
Fusion, XGBoost also performs best with an accuracy of 93.5%. Here, XGBoost performs
significantly better than the two other models, with no overlapping confidence intervals.
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP­baseline
79.8 ± 0.21 / 56.1
79.6 ± 0.21 / 58.1
79.5 ± 0.20 / 50.0
CLIP­outlined
87.9 ± 0.17 / 78.6
87.9 ± 0.17 / 78.3
86.5 ± 0.17 / 75.0
CLIP­masked
89.7 ± 0.16 / 82.3
89.6 ± 0.16 / 82.0
88.2 ± 0.17 / 79.0
Spectral­single
90.1 ± 0.16 / 83.9
89.8 ± 0.16 / 82.1
88.8 ± 0.16 / 83.4
Spectral­seasonal
92.7 ± 0.13 / 86.5
93.3 ± 0.12 / 88.4
93.5 ± 0.13 / 90.0
Table 4.6: S2­B test performance for crop vs. non­crop classification with accuracy ± CI
and avg. recall (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP­baseline
80.9 ± 0.19 / 52.0
80.8 ± 0.19 / 51.5
80.8 ± 0.20 / 50.0
CLIP­outlined
88.2 ± 0.16 / 76.5
88.0 ± 0.16 / 76.2
87.2 ± 0.17 / 73.0
CLIP­masked
90.3 ± 0.15 / 82.0
90.2 ± 0.15 / 81.9
89.5 ± 0.15 / 79.6
Spectral­single
90.2 ± 0.15 / 80.9
90.2 ± 0.15 / 80.8
90.3 ± 0.15 / 82.2
Spectral­seasonal
93.1 ± 0.13 / 86.6
92.7 ± 0.13 / 85.5
93.5 ± 0.13 / 89.4
Table 4.7: PS­B test performance for crop vs. non­crop classification with accuracy ± CI
and avg. recall (%).
Figure 4.20 shows the predicted probability distributions for the crop field segments and
the non­crop field segments for the best­performing model, XGBoost, for area B. The
density plots are normalized, which hides the the class imbalance. It shows that for CLIP­
baseline, almost all segments are classified as not crop fields, explaining the model’s
high accuracy of 79.5 and low average recall of 50.5 (Table 4.6). For CLIP­baseline,
Spectral­single and Spectral­seasonal, the model shows increasingly confident separa­
tion, reflecting the increasing accuracies in Table 4.6 for the feature sets.
36
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.20: Predicted probability distributions for crop and non­crop using XGBoost on
Sentinel­2 area B for the four features sets CLIP–baseline, CLIP–masked, Spectral–single
and Spectral–seasonal. The dashed line marks the 0.5 decision threshold.
Table 4.8 and 4.9 show the selected parameters during cross­validation for the best­
performing models on Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion.
XGBoost for Sentinel­2 used no
regularization for the number of leaves (γ = 0) but applied mild regularization to the leaf
weights (α = 0.1 and λ = 0.1), while XGBoost for PlanetFusion used some regularization
(γ = 2) for the number of leaves and stronger regularization on the leaf weights (α = 0.5
and λ = 0.5) compared to XGBoost for Sentinel­2.
XGBoost (Sentinel­2)
max depth
4
learning rate
0.1
obs. sample
0.8
feat. sample
0.8
alpha
0.1
lambda
0.1
gamma
0
early stopping
63
Table 4.8: Selected parameters for XG­
Boost on Sentinel­2.
XGBoost (PlanetFusion)
max depth
4
learning rate
0.1
obs. sample
0.8
feat. sample
0.8
alpha
0.5
lambda
0.5
gamma
2
early stopping
50
Table 4.9: Selected parameters for XG­
Boost on PlanetFusion.
4.2.2
Crop type classification
This section presents the results of segment classification of crop types using the three
probes Logistic Regression, Focal Logistic Regression and XGBoost for the five feature
sets from each of the two sources (Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion). Additional results of
the classification, including the best cross­validation scores and training results, can be
found in Section 7.10.
Table 4.6 and 4.7 show the test results for area B for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion, re­
spectively. In all cases, Spectral­seasonal provides significantly better results than any
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
37
==PAGE:44==
other feature set. For Spectral­seasonal of Sentinel­2, XGBoost performs significantly
better than the two other models with an accuracy of 69.6, and for Spectral­seasonal of
PlanetFusion, Logistic Regression performs significantly better than the two other models
with an accuracy of 73.6.
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP­baseline
19.9 ± 0.46 / 14.7
19.1 ± 0.45 / 14.5
19.7 ± 0.46 / 12.8
CLIP­outlined
26.6 ± 0.50 / 19.2
26.4 ± 0.51 / 19.8
23.2 ± 0.51 / 16.2
CLIP­masked
27.0 ± 0.50 / 19.4
27.0 ± 0.49 / 19.3
25.2 ± 0.48 / 17.5
Spectral­single
38.2 ± 0.56 / 29.5
35.6 ± 0.55 / 26.1
38.7 ± 0.57 / 30.1
Spectral­seasonal
66.5 ± 0.55 / 62.7
65.7 ± 0.54 / 63.5
69.6 ± 0.53 / 67.9
Table 4.10: S2­B test performance for crop type classification with accuracy ± CI and
avg. recall (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP­baseline
20.3 ± 0.46 / 14.7
20.6 ± 0.46 / 14.7
20.2 ± 0.46 / 12.4
CLIP­outlined
26.3 ± 0.53 / 19.0
26.3 ± 0.52 / 19.8
25.4 ± 0.49 / 17.2
CLIP­masked
29.6 ± 0.53 / 21.9
29.4 ± 0.53 / 22.0
26.5 ± 0.52 / 19.1
Spectral­single
30.8 ± 0.54 / 21.5
30.4 ± 0.54 / 21.1
33.5 ± 0.54 / 24.1
Spectral­seasonal
73.6 ± 0.53 / 72.6
70.1 ± 0.52 / 69.2
69.3 ± 0.54 / 66.9
Table 4.11: PS­B test performance for crop type classification with accuracy ± CI and
avg. recall (%).
Table 4.12 and 4.13 show the per­crop recall and support for the best models for Sentinel­2
and PlanetFusion, XGBoost and Logistic Regression. They show a less balanced recall
for XGBoost compared to Logistic Regression, where only forage crops have a recall
below 50%. Both models perform well for rye, corn, oil seeds and meadows, all with a
recall above 80%, and poorly for barley and forage crops, both with a recall below 55%.
Crop
Recall ± CI (%)
Support
Wheat
54.5 ± 0.03
4.894
Rye
91.2 ± 0.02
5.731
Barley
24.0 ± 0.03
4.040
Oats
61.3 ± 0.09
676
Corn
97.0 ± 0.01
4.227
Oil Seeds
83.8 ± 0.03
3.532
Root Crops
58.7 ± 0.29
56
Meadows
83.9 ± 0.03
4.173
Forage Crops
43.1 ± 0.04
3.210
Table 4.12: S2­B per­crop recall and
support for Spectral­seasonal with
XGBoost.
Crop
Recall ± CI (%)
Support
Wheat
68.0 ± 0.03
4.608
Rye
92.6 ± 0.02
5.359
Barley
52.4 ± 0.04
3.755
Oats
53.6 ± 0.08
682
Corn
85.9 ± 0.02
4.061
Oil Seeds
86.9 ± 0.03
3.376
Root Crops
89.4 ± 0.14
85
Meadows
81.2 ± 0.02
4.382
Forage Crops
38.8 ± 0.04
3.226
Table 4.13: PS­2 per­crop recall and
support for Spectral­seasonal with
Logistic Regression.
Figure 4.21 shows an example of the early stopping criterion applied to XGBoost for
Sentinel­2. It shows the classification error for the early stopping model (ES) (with a 20%
validation set) and the final model (using the entire training set). For the early stopping
model, the training error keeps decreasing, while the validation error flattens around iter­
ation 60 and does not decrease for five rounds from iteration 62 to 67. That determines
the early stopping at iteration 62 for the final model, with a classification error just above
0.3 on the test set, reflecting the 69.6 accuracy in Table 4.10, and a classification error
around 0.06 on the training set, reflecting the 93.8 accuracy in Table 7.11.
38
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.21: XGBoost training curves for S2­A (Train) and S2­B (Test). The solid lines
show training performance, dashed lines show validation/test performance and the
dotted vertical line indicates the early stopping point.
Table 4.14 and 4.15 show the selected parameters during cross­validation for the best­
performing models on Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion. XGBoost used no regularization for
the number of leaves (γ = 0) but applied some regularization to the leaf weights (α = 1
and λ = 0.1), while Logistic Regression used l2 regularization with C = 0.1.
XGBoost
max depth
3
learning rate
0.1
obs. sample
0.8
feat. sample
0.8
alpha
1
lambda
0.1
gamma
0
Table 4.14: Selected parameters for XG­
Boost on Sentinel­2.
Logistic Regression
C
0.1
l1 ratio
0
Table 4.15: Selected parameters for Logis­
tic Regression on PlanetFusion.
4.3
Explainability with SHAP
The overall most influential features, measured by the average absolute Shapley value,
are shown in Figure 4.16. It shows that among the top ten influential features, nine are
measurements for May, June and July, which is likely the growing season for most crop
types. Table 4.17 shows the average absolute Shapley value per feature type, categorized
as raw bands, GLCM (texture features), HSI and vegetation indices. It shows that the
average absolute Shapley value for raw bands (0,0184) is very similar to the value of
vegetation indices (0,0205), while GLCM scores lowest. HSI shows the highest average
absolute Shapley value, but it should be noted that this average is calculated from only
three features per month compared to 24 for raw bands (12 bands with mean and standard
deviation) and 15 for vegetation indices.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
39
==PAGE:46==
Feature
Mean |SHAP|
sipi (jul)
1,295
S (jun)
1,236
band 11 (jun)
1,183
band 3 (may)
1,119
band 6 (jun)
0,826
band 6 (may)
0,762
band 10 (jun)
0,700
dvi (jul)
0,660
sipi (sep)
0,611
band 12 (may)
0,516
Table 4.16:
Top 10 features by mean
|SHAP| over all classes.
Feature family
Mean |SHAP|
Raw bands
0,0184
GLCM
0,0018
HSI
0,0341
Vegetation index
0,0205
Table 4.17: Overall mean |SHAP| by fea­
ture family.
Figure 4.22 shows the average absolute Shapley value for each feature type per crop
type. It shows a fairly even spread of scores for raw bands and vegetation indices across
the crop types, while GLCM seems to primarily contribute to the predictions of oats and
forage crops. HSI has a large contribution to the prediction of barley, but its importance
for predicting barley can be misleading, as barley has a recall of only 24% (as shown in
Table 4.12).
Figure 4.22: Per­crop mean |SHAP| for each feature category
Figure 4.23 shows the average absolute Shapley value per crop type across month and
feature type. It shows that the late spring (April and May) and early summer (June and
July) months contribute the most for predicting all crop types other than meadows, likely
due to their growing season. For example, the predictions of oil seeds, which ”generally
flower in late spring”[45], producing distinct yellow flowers, are greatly influenced by the
May features. For the raw bands, the predictions overall are mostly affected by bands 3,
5, 6, 11 and 12, while bands 2, 7, 8 and 9 have almost no contribution to the predictions.
Similarly, for the vegetation indices and texture features, only a minority of the features,
such as homogeneity, SIPI and GARI, contribute to the predictions.
40
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.23: Mean absolute SHAP values per crop type and feature group. Colors range
from white (low importance) to dark blue and red (high importance).
The features that contribute most to the predictions of meadows, oil seeds and corn are
shown in Table 4.18 along with their average Shapley values. It shows that the prediction
of meadows are highlt affected by the vegetation index SIPI in July and band 3 in Augost
and September. Figure 4.24a illustrates why these features are relevant for predicting
meadows. It shows the mean and standard deviation for the two features for meadows
and for all other crop types combined. Especially in August and September, the figure
shows that the values for meadows are generally lower than for the other crop types,
likely due to the harvesting season for other crop types.
Combining all other crop types into a single average can be deceiving, but Figure 7.5,
which includes the average for all crop types, individually, shows the same trend. How­
ever, the mean values for meadows overlap with forage and root crops for SIPI in July and
with forage crops for band 3 in August and September. The overlap between meadows
and forage crops is also indicated in the t­SNE feature space in Figure 4.19d.
Meadows
Oil Seeds
Corn
Feature
Mean |SHAP|
Feature
Mean |SHAP|
Feature
Mean |SHAP|
sipi (jul)
0,741
band 3 (may)
1,654
band 5 (jul)
0,981
band 3 (aug)
0,561
band 6 (jun)
0,906
dvi (may)
0,646
band 3 (sep)
0,451
band 6 (may)
0,749
band 12 (may)
0,626
sipi (sep)
0,399
band 11 (jun)
0,582
H (may)
0,510
band 11 (jun)
0,290
band 11 (may)
0,428
band 1 (may)
0,430
gari (jul)
0,241
I (may)
0,240
band 10 (jul)
0,271
dvi (sep)
0,137
vigreen (jun)
0,198
band 11 (aug)
0,264
gari (may)
0,136
band 3 (jun)
0,178
sipi (may)
0,156
gari (aug)
0,123
band 12 (may)
0,153
rdvi (may)
0,151
ndvi (may)
0,109
ndwi (may)
0,134
sipi (sep)
0,150
Table 4.18: Top 10 features by mean |SHAP| for meadows, oil seeds and corn
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
41
==PAGE:48==
(a) Top 2 features for predicted Meadows across months
(A).
(b) Top 5 features for predicted Meadows vs
others (area A).
(c) Top 5 features for true Meadows vs others
(area B).
Figure 4.24b illustrates the same means and standard deviations as Figure 4.24a, but
for five features instead of two. As mentioned, the model is trained on area A, and the
top features are selected based on the average absolute Shapley values for samples
predicted as meadows. To illustrate how well it may generalize, Figure 4.24c shows the
means and standard deviations for the same features, but for the segments categorized
as meadows (based on ground truth labels) in area B. It shows the same overall pattern.
Meadows generally have distinct values for these features compared to the other crop
types, though the overlaps, based on the standard deviations, are larger compared to
Figure 4.24b.
Sections 7.11.2 and 7.11.3 show similar findings for oil seeds and corn. Especially band
6 in May for oil seeds and band 5 in July for corn seem to separate them from most other
crop types, which aligns with Table 4.18.
4.4
Active Learning
The overall performance of active learning for the best performing classification model
for Sentinel­2, XGBoost, on the Spectral­seasonal feature set is shown in Figure 4.25. It
shows that the accuracy plateaus when the model is trained on around 250 to 500 high­
entropy samples, while the entropy of the unlabeled samples continuously decreases as
the model becomes more confident. The average recall for entropy sampling seems to
plateau after around 600 labeled samples. Compared to random sampling, the figure
shows that the two methods develop very similarly in terms of accuracy, while entropy
sampling performs better in terms of average recall.
42
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:49==
(a) Accuracy and average recall (entropy +
random)
(b) Entropy of unlabeled samples
Figure 4.25: Active learning performance for XGBoost on Sentinel­2 (area A)
A similar pattern is shown in Figure 4.26, which shows the recall per class for entropy
sampling and random sampling. It shows that random sampling quickly gains high accu­
racy by correctly predicting the crop types with large support (Table 2.5) and high accuracy
in the final model predictions (Table 4.12), such as corn and oil seeds, while its recall for
barley, forage crops and roots crops stay low compared to the results of entropy sam­
pling. Entropy sampling, on the other hand, achieves a more balanced accuracy, with
most crop types reaching a recall of at least 0.4 after 250 labeled samples. Especially
in Figure 4.26 (a), the recall for wheat and rye varies inversely (when one increases, the
other decreases), indicating that the two crop types overlap in feature space. When the
decision boundary between them changes, it primarily benefits only one of them. Their
overlap is also reflected in the latent feature space plot in Figure 4.19d.
(a) Per­class recall (entropy sampling)
(b) Per­class recall (random sampling)
Figure 4.26: Per­class recall comparison between entropy and random sampling for
XGBoost on Sentinel­2 (area A).
Figure 4.27 shows the sample selection by crop type for entropy sampling and random
sampling. Expectedly, random sampling favors crop types with large support (Table 2.5).
Contrarily, entropy sampling tends to oversample crop types that are difficult to predict
(Table 4.12) such as barley, oats, and root crops, therefore achieving a better average
recall.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
43
==PAGE:50==
Active learning (entropy)
Random sampling
Figure 4.27: Cumulative number of labeled samples per class under active learning and
random sampling for XGBoost on Sentinel­2 (area A).
44
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion
The point­grid segmentation showed no statistically significant difference between Sentinel­
2 and PlanetFusion, even though PlanetFusion is a more expensive product with a higher
spatial resolution of 3 m/px compared to Sentinel­2’s 10 m/px for the color bands. They
both achieved a per­image ABO of around 0.47 (with a weighted ABO of around 0.64) for
area A and 0.40 (with a weighted ABO of around 0.54) for area B (Table 4.1), using the
selected hyperparameters that lowered the thresholds for stability and NMS (Table 2.1).
The point­grid segmentation using SAM’s default parameters achieved worse results, with
little performance difference between the two sources (Table 7.2).
The single­point segmentation showed a significant difference between Sentinel­2 and
PlanetFusion (Table 4.2), with PlanetFusion achieving an IoU approximately 19% higher
than Sentinel­2 for both areas. A likely reason for the difference between the results
is that the point­grid segmentation used thresholding for the predicted IoU and stability
scores, which on average differ between the two sources. As shown in Figure 7.4, the
predictions for PlanetFusion generally achieve a higher IoU but a lower (predicted) IoU
score compared to Sentinel­2. This difference seems to make the point­grid segmentation
unfair for comparison when using the same thresholds for both sources.
One could significantly lower the thresholds for the IoU and stability scores, but this leads
to an increase in predictions that inflate the performance measurements (as shown in
Figure 4.9) with lower segmentation quality (as shown in Figure 4.8). For practical use,
this indicates that the two sources require individual calibration of the hyperparameters to
achieve the best results.
The overall performance in ABO may seem low, while the visual results are generally good
(as shown in Figure 4.8d), reflecting two challenges in the underlying data. Some crop
fields are large with well­defined borders (as in Figure 4.7a), resembling the appearance
of a typical crop field, while others are small with no clear visual boundaries between
them (as in Figure 4.7b). This is also reflected in the per­crop ABO results in Figure 4.11,
where crop types such as root crops, meadows, and forage crops perform considerably
worse than the others. The segmentation performance further depends on the date of the
satellite image as shown in Figure 4.12a. Another challenge is the discrepancy between
some ground truth labels and their visual appearance as shown in Figure 4.10, where
a one ground truth label (the green instance in the middle) can be interpreted as two or
three separate crop fields.
Comparing the results with the literature, Scribano (2025)[7] used the same point­grid
segmentation approach as in this thesis and similarly using a 32×32 grid on Sentinel­2
imagery. Using zero­shot, they achieved an mAR150 (average recall at 0.5 IoU with a
maximum of 150 detections per image) of 15.1, and 43.3 for their best fine­tuned model.
In this thesis, the average recall at 0.5 IoU for Sentinel­2 was 0.463 for area A and 0.404
for area B (Table 4.1), but the performance highly depends on the crop types to be seg­
mented.
A different approach to the point­grid segmentation without using ground truth knowledge
would be to provide SAM with a learned point or bounding box for each crop field. This
approach was applied by Teng (2025)[6] for tree crown instance segmentation from drone
imagery using SAM. Their objects are smaller and their spatial resolution is higher (5
mm/px), so it is not directly comparable, but they achieved an ABO of 35.06 and 34.01
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
45
==PAGE:52==
using the same point­grid approach as this thesis with a 10×10 and 100×100 point grid,
respectively. By training a CNN to detect objects (using both image and DSM, a height
map) and feeding their bounding boxes to SAM, their best model achieved an ABO of
78.27. It reflects the increase in ABO from the point­grid segmentation (Table 4.1) to
the average IoU in the single­point segmentation (Table 4.2) in this thesis, though their
increase is much larger. This could indicate that using a bounding box prompt is better
than using a point prompt.
Osco (2023)[3] used the Grounding DINO model to find objects in satellite images based
on text prompts and, similarly to Teng (2025)[6], used their points and bounding boxes
as prompts for SAM. It is an interesting approach, as it is zero­shot and therefore doesn’t
require training a model like Teng (2025)[6]. The text prompt approach showed better
results for tree segmentation with an IoU of 85.2 compared to 79.9 using point prompts, but
a lower IoU than point and bounding box prompts for all other objects (house, plantation,
building, car and lake).
Neither of the super­resolution models improved the segmentation performance, though
the blending method used to reduce the edges between patches showed significantly
better performance compared to when the method was not applied. As shown in Figure
4.14, the segmentation was highly affected by the edges between the patches. Apart
from smoothing the edges, it could also improve the quality of the images, as the Hanning
window (Equation 2.8) gives more weight to the center pixels in each patch, which are
likely the ones the model is most confident about.
The fine­tuning significantly improved the single­point segmentation by 27.9% based on
IoU for single­point segmentation on the test area (from 0.43 to 0.55), as shown in Table
4.5. The best performing fine­tuning method was the baseline, which used all ground
truth masks and no frozen components. The fine­tuning led to a drift in the (predicted)
IoU and stability scores (as shown in Figure 7.3), which complicates the comparison using
point­grid segmentation. In practice, the point­grid segmentation is likely improved by the
fine­tuning method. It just needs to be recalibrated.
The Spectral­seasonal feature set achieved the best classification performance, showing
that seasonality is important for distinguishing crop fields from other segments and sepa­
rating them by crop type. The crop field or not a crop field classification achieved 93.5%
accuracy with the XGBoost model on both Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion. This seems like
a good result, considering that not all areas that appear to be crop fields are labeled as
such (as shown in Figure 4.7). The crop type classification achieved a lower accuracy
of 69.6% with the XGBoost model on Sentinel­2 and 73.6% with the Logistic Regression
model on PlanetFusion.
The Spectral­seasonal feature set was included based on the poor results from the other
feature sets and the reasoning that classifying a crop field by its type based on e.g. a
February satellite image, before it is even seeded, is near impossible. As mentioned,
many of the features in the Spectral feature sets are inspired by Yang (2020)[11], who
similarly classified crop types (along with urban areas) based on Sentinel­2 images. Their
approach was different, as they did not classify by segments but per (semantic segmen­
tation), and used segment features instead. They achieved an accuracy of 94.27% with
their best model for an area in China with the four classes rice, urban, corn and soybean,
using satellite images from three dates. Their accuracy is considerably better compared
to the results in this thesis for crop­type classification, but as shown in Table 4.12, with
Rye and Corn both having accuracies above 90%, it depends heavily on the crop types
to be classified and how similar they are. Overall, their results with four classes are fairly
46
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:53==
similar to this thesis’ results with two classes, crop field or not a crop field.
The importance of seasonality for crop type classification was also emphasized by the
mean absolute Shapley values by month (Figure 4.23), showing that the features for late
spring and early summer (May, June, and July) contribute the most to this classification.
This aligns with the segmentation results in Figure 4.12b, where oil seeds, corn, and root
crops peak in May and rye and barley peak in June. This is, as mentioned, likely due to
the growing season, where e.g. oil seeds in Germany generally flower in late spring[46].
The most contributing features for classifying oil seeds were Band 3 and Band 6 from May
and June (Table 4.18), where especially Band 6 for May shows a good separation from
the other crop types (Figure 7.6a). This aligns with Müller (2008) [47], who analyzed the
reflectance spectrum of oil seeds in Germany using a spectrometer. They found that the
”waveband combinations, especially those derived from λ750 and λ740 in the NDI form
and from λ740 and λ780 in the NDI form as well as in the SR form, showed stable results
for most crop canopy parameters” for oil seeds, aligning with Sentinel­2’s Band 6, which
measures the reflectance at λ740 (Table 3.1).
XGBoost achieved an accuracy of around 65% with only 250 samples (Figure 4.25) using
both entropy and random sampling, after which it slowly climbed toward the final accuracy
of 69.6%. Entropy sampling showed no advantage over random sampling in terms of ac­
curacy, but its tendency to oversample difficult crop types (Figure 4.27) makes it favorable
when a high average recall is preferred.
Future work
One of the findings in this thesis was the improved classification accuracy when using
the Spectral­seasonal feature set compared to the non­seasonal feature sets. A similar
method could be applied to the segmentation part. As mentioned, Teng (2025)[6] im­
proved tree crown segmentation from 35.06 to 78.27 ABO by training a model for object
detection and using the objects’ bounding boxes instead of relying on a point grid for
SAM’s segmentation. Similarly, future work could examine the effect of training a model
to detect crop fields based on a per­pixel feature map similar to the Spectral­seasonal
feature set. As shown in Figure 7.8, using the three features that contribute the most to
the prediction of corn (Table 4.18) makes the corn field stand out in an area with other
crop fields, forests, and urban areas.
In this thesis, the feature space for entropy­sampling (using e.g. 250 samples) was not
investigated due to time constraints. However, this presents itself as a future opportu­
nity, as understanding the underlying feature space of the high­entropy samples could
reveal patterns of the model’s uncertainty, leading to a more efficient sampling strategy
and bringing it closer to semi­automatic labeling. For instance, visualizations of the high­
entropy samples in a latent feature space along with the model’s decision boundaries
could reveal the representative segments for each class needed for the classification.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
47
==PAGE:54==
6
Conclusion
The point­grid segmentation showed no statistically significant difference between Sentinel­
2 and PlanetFusion, with a per­image ABO of approximately 0.47 for area A and 0.40
for area B (Table 4.1), while the single­point segmentation showed an approximately
19% higher IoU for PlanetFusion compared to Sentinel­2. Fine­tuning SAM improved
the single­point segmentation by 27.9% (from 0.43 to 0.55) for the test area (Table 4.5),
while the use of super­resolution models to enhance the Sentinel­2 images showed no
positive effect on the single­point segmentation of Sentinel­2 images (Table 4.2 and 4.3).
These results demonstrate that PlanetFusion provides a modest advantage for single­
point segmentation and crop­type classification, while fine­tuning substantially improves
performance, even without the need for image super­resolution.
The classification of the segments resulted in 93.5% accuracy on both Sentinel­2 and
PlanetFusion for crop field or not a crop field classification, and 69.6% and 73.6% ac­
curacy on Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion, respectively, for crop type classification. Active
learning showed that the best­performing model on Sentinel­2, XGBoost, reached the tar­
get accuracy and average recall using only 250 to 500 samples selected by high entropy
(Figure 4.25). The Spectral–seasonal feature set showed significantly better results com­
pared to the non­seasonal feature sets, with e.g. features like vegetation index SIPI in
July and band 3 in August and September being highly relevant for classifying meadows
(Figure 7.5). The results for the Spectral–seasonal feature set indicate that classification
of crop fields in a semi­automatic labeling process likely requires images from across the
season.
48
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:55==
7
Apendix
7.1
Band histograms for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion
Figure 7.1: Band value histograms for Sentinel­2 (blue) and PlanetFusion (green)
imagery. Each subplot shows the distribution of pixel intensities for a specific spectral
band
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
49
==PAGE:56==
7.2
Single­band segmentation results
Source
Band Index
ABO
WABO
S2­A
1
0.103 ± 0.007
0.126 ± 0.011
2
0.316 ± 0.019
0.459 ± 0.025
3
0.315 ± 0.018
0.457 ± 0.025
4
0.311 ± 0.018
0.449 ± 0.023
5
0.220 ± 0.016
0.321 ± 0.023
6
0.197 ± 0.015
0.291 ± 0.021
7
0.194 ± 0.014
0.281 ± 0.020
8
0.286 ± 0.018
0.422 ± 0.024
9
0.187 ± 0.014
0.275 ± 0.019
11
0.136 ± 0.007
0.146 ± 0.010
11
0.185 ± 0.014
0.269 ± 0.021
12
0.204 ± 0.016
0.296 ± 0.021
S2­B
1
0.091 ± 0.011
0.114 ± 0.014
2
0.257 ± 0.022
0.361 ± 0.028
3
0.268 ± 0.023
0.381 ± 0.029
4
0.274 ± 0.024
0.390 ± 0.031
5
0.189 ± 0.019
0.279 ± 0.026
6
0.209 ± 0.021
0.313 ± 0.027
7
0.206 ± 0.020
0.311 ± 0.027
8
0.269 ± 0.023
0.384 ± 0.030
9
0.202 ± 0.020
0.300 ± 0.027
10
0.153 ± 0.013
0.180 ± 0.017
11
0.178 ± 0.018
0.262 ± 0.024
12
0.191 ± 0.019
0.284 ± 0.026
PS­A
1
0.367 ± 0.020
0.511 ± 0.025
2
0.400 ± 0.021
0.539 ± 0.026
3
0.373 ± 0.021
0.506 ± 0.026
4
0.356 ± 0.019
0.498 ± 0.023
PS­B
1
0.298 ± 0.025
0.426 ± 0.033
2
0.320 ± 0.025
0.446 ± 0.033
3
0.314 ± 0.024
0.438 ± 0.032
4
0.312 ± 0.025
0.430 ± 0.032
Table 7.1: Single­band segmentation results showing average best overlap (ABO) and
weighted ABO (WABO) across Sentinel­2 (S2) and PlanetFusion (PS) for areas A and B.
50
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:57==
7.3
Point­grid segmentation results using SAM’s default
hyperparameters
Source
Area
ABO
Weighted ABO
Avg. pred
S2
A
0.358 ± 0.005
0.499 ± 0.007
37.6
S2
B
0.311 ± 0.008
0.423 ± 0.010
33.2
PS
A
0.354 ± 0.005
0.494 ± 0.007
37.6
PS
B
0.312 ± 0.008
0.427 ± 0.010
33.9
Source
@IoU
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
S2­A
Precision
0.311
0.285
0.255
0.214
0.126
Recall
0.354
0.324
0.290
0.243
0.143
S2­B
Precision
0.254
0.232
0.209
0.174
0.095
Recall
0.311
0.285
0.256
0.213
0.116
PS­A
Precision
0.307
0.282
0.255
0.221
0.149
Recall
0.349
0.320
0.290
0.251
0.169
PS­B
Precision
0.247
0.227
0.207
0.177
0.108
Recall
0.310
0.285
0.259
0.221
0.135
Table 7.2: Segmentation evaluation for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion for both areas using
point­grid segmentation with SAM’s default hyperparameters. Per­image ABO, weighted
per­image ABO, and average predictions per image. Bottom table shows precision and
recall at IoU thresholds.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
51
==PAGE:58==
7.4
Histograms for the single­point segmentation results for
Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion
Figure 7.2: single­point segmentation results for Sentinel­2 and PlanetFusion across the
two areas.
52
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:59==
7.5
Histograms for the single­point segmentation results for
the original and fine­tuned SAM model.
Figure 7.3:
single­point segmentation results the original and fine­tuned model for
Sentinel­2 across the train (A) and test (B) area.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
53
==PAGE:60==
7.6
Prompt­based test results for CLIP
Figure 7.4: Comparison of the prompt­based and linear probe approaches on pairs of
crops containing ground truth masks (positive) and random crops without ground truth
masks (negative) for Sentinel­2 area A and B.
54
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:61==
7.7
Vegetation index formulas
Spectral Index
Formula
NDVI
B8 −B4
B8 + B4
DVI
B8 −B4
RDVI
B8 −B4
√
B8 + B4
NDWI
B3 −B8
B3 + B8
RVI
B8
B4
EVI
2.5 ×
B8 −B4
B8 + 6B4 −7.5B2 + 1
TVI
0.5 × [120(B8 −B3) −200(B4 −B3)]
TCARI
3 × [(B8 −B4) −0.2(B8 −B3)(B8
B4)]
GI
B3
B4
VIgreen
B3 −B4
B3 + B4
VARIgreen
B3 −B4
B3 + B4 −B2
GARI
B8 −[B3 −(B2 −B4)]
B8 −[B3 + (B2 −B4)]
GDVI
B8 −B3
SAVI
1.5 ×
B8 −B4
B8 + B4 + 0.5
SIPI
B8 −B2
B8 −B4
Table 7.3: Vegetation index calculation formulas. B2, B3, B4 and B8 correspond to
Sentinel­2 bands. Based on [11].
7.8
Texture feature formulas
Feature
Formula
Energy
√∑
i
∑
j
p(i, j)2
Contrast
∑
i
∑
j
(i −j)2 p(i, j)
Homogeneity
∑
i
∑
j
p(i, j)
1 + (i −j)2
Entropy
−
∑
i
∑
j
p(i, j) log p(i, j)
Table 7.4: GLCM texture feature formulas. p(i, j) is the normalized GLCM matrix.[31]
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
55
==PAGE:62==
7.9
Additional results for crop field vs. not a crop field
classification
Best cross­validation scores
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
70.9
70.8
70.9
CLIP–outlined
84.1
83.8
83.1
CLIP–masked
86.2
86.1
86.0
Spectral–single
87.2
86.8
89.0
Spectral–seasonal
92.4
92.2
92.8
Table 7.5: S2­A best cross­validation score (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
72.1
71.8
72.1
CLIP–outlined
84.2
83.9
83.6
CLIP–masked
87.7
87.5
87.6
Spectral–single
87.7
87.6
88.8
Spectral–seasonal
91.1
91.0
92.2
Table 7.6: PS­A best cross­validation score (%).
Training results (area A)
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
71.8 ± 0.21 / 57.5
71.4 ± 0.21 / 59.2
70.6 ± 0.22 / 50.0
CLIP–outlined
86.1 ± 0.16 / 81.8
86.0 ± 0.16 / 81.9
84.1 ± 0.17 / 78.4
CLIP–masked
87.8 ± 0.15 / 84.3
87.7 ± 0.15 / 84.2
86.7 ± 0.16 / 82.2
Spectral–single
87.5 ± 0.16 / 84.4
87.1 ± 0.16 / 83.6
86.7 ± 0.16 / 83.5
Spectral–seasonal
93.9 ± 0.12 / 92.7
93.3 ± 0.12 / 91.9
92.4 ± 0.13 / 91.0
Table 7.7: S2­A train performance for crop vs. non­crop classification with accuracy ± CI
and avg. recall (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
72.3 ± 0.20 / 52.5
72.6 ± 0.21 / 52.8
72.1 ± 0.21 / 50.0
CLIP–outlined
86.6 ± 0.15 / 81.2
86.6 ± 0.16 / 81.2
84.3 ± 0.16 / 77.1
CLIP–masked
88.8 ± 0.14 / 85.0
88.7 ± 0.15 / 85.0
88.1 ± 0.15 / 83.5
Spectral–single
88.0 ± 0.14 / 84.6
87.9 ± 0.14 / 84.5
88.1 ± 0.15 / 84.1
Spectral–seasonal
91.9 ± 0.13 / 90.0
91.9 ± 0.13 / 90.1
92.4 ± 0.12 / 90.8
Table 7.8: PS­A train performance for crop vs. non­crop classification with accuracy ±
CI and avg. recall (%).
56
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:63==
7.10
Additional results for crop type classification
Best cross­validation scores
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
21.2
21.0
21.8
CLIP–outlined
29.2
28.7
28.9
CLIP–masked
30.9
30.7
30.0
Spectral–single
42.3
39.3
50.6
Spectral–seasonal
88.4
87.7
88.2
Table 7.9: S2­A best cross­validation score (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
19.8
19.4
20.3
CLIP–outlined
26.6
26.4
26.5
CLIP–masked
31.4
31.1
30.1
Spectral–single
32.2
29.8
42.0
Spectral–seasonal
84.5
82.8
83.7
Table 7.10: PS­A best cross­validation score (%).
Training results (area A)
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
36.6 ± 0.41 / 26.1
36.8 ± 0.41 / 27.9
36.4 ± 0.41 / 25.7
CLIP–outlined
49.6 ± 0.42 / 39.0
50.0 ± 0.42 / 41.3
35.6 ± 0.39 / 26.2
CLIP–masked
46.8 ± 0.42 / 36.6
45.5 ± 0.44 / 35.3
41.0 ± 0.42 / 31.0
Spectral–single
45.2 ± 0.42 / 35.4
42.3 ± 0.43 / 32.1
59.5 ± 0.40 / 49.6
Spectral–seasonal
94.9 ± 0.19 / 93.0
94.5 ± 0.19 / 92.3
93.8 ± 0.21 / 92.3
Table 7.11: S2­A train performance for crop type classification with accuracy ± CI and
avg. recall (%).
Feature set
Logistic Regression
Focal Logistic Regression
XGBoost
CLIP–baseline
38.1 ± 0.42 / 27.2
37.3 ± 0.42 / 27.1
31.9 ± 0.40 / 19.8
CLIP–outlined
49.9 ± 0.45 / 37.5
50.4 ± 0.45 / 39.4
49.4 ± 0.43 / 40.7
CLIP–masked
48.8 ± 0.44 / 37.2
47.6 ± 0.43 / 36.5
41.7 ± 0.44 / 31.6
Spectral–single
36.4 ± 0.42 / 26.2
34.7 ± 0.42 / 24.9
47.6 ± 0.44 / 36.0
Spectral–seasonal
93.3 ± 0.22 / 91.5
90.5 ± 0.26 / 85.8
93.0 ± 0.23 / 91.4
Table 7.12: PS­A train performance for crop type classification with accuracy ± CI and
avg. recall (%).
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
57
==PAGE:64==
7.11
Additional feature analysis by crop type
7.11.1
Meadows
(a) ”sipi” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
(b) ”band 3” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
Figure 7.5: Feature evolution across months for the two most influential Meadows features
in the training area (A).
7.11.2
Oil Seeds
(a) Top 2 features for predicted oil seeds across months
(area A).
(b) ”band 3” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
(c) ”band 6” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
(d) Top 5 features for predicted oil seeds vs oth­
ers (area A).
(e) Top 5 features for true oil seeds vs others
(area B).
Figure 7.6: Comparison of top features for oil seeds between training area (A) and test
area (B).
58
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:65==
7.11.3
Corn
(a) Top 2 features for predicted corn across months (A).
(b) ”sipi” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
(c) ”dvi” values by predicted class across
months (area A).
(d) Top 5 features for predicted corn vs others
(area A).
(e) Top 5 features for true corn vs others (area
B).
Figure 7.7: Comparison of top features for corn between training area (A) and test area
(B).
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
59
==PAGE:66==
7.12
Example of Sentinel­2 tile with top three features for
corn as channels
Figure 7.8: Left: raw Sentinel­2 image (May). Middle: Ground truth crop fields. Right: top
three features for corn r = Band 5 (Jul), b = DVI (May), b = Band1 2 (May).
60
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:67==
Declaration of AI use
Copilot was used during the coding process. It automatically provides suggestions based
on existing code.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
61
==PAGE:68==
62
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Getahun, H. Kefale, and Y. Gelaye. “Application of Precision Agriculture Tech­
nologies for Sustainable Crop Production and Environmental Sustainability: A Sys­
tematic Review”. In: The Scientific World Journal 2024 (Oct. 2024), p. 2126734.
DOI: 10.1155/2024/2126734. URL: https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/2126734.
[2]
Clement Atzberger. “Advances in Remote Sensing of Agriculture: Context Descrip­
tion, Existing Operational Monitoring Systems and Major Information Needs”. In:
Remote Sensing 5.2 (2013), pp. 949–981. ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs5020949.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/5/2/949.
[3]
Lucas Prado Osco et al. “The Segment Anything Model (SAM) for remote sens­
ing applications: From zero to one shot”. In: International Journal of Applied Earth
Observation and Geoinformation 124 (2023), p. 103540. ISSN: 1569­8432. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2023.103540. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1569843223003643.
[4]
Nikhila Ravi et al. “SAM 2: Segment Anything in Images and Videos”. In: (2024).
URL: https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/sam-2-segment-anything-in-images-
and-videos/.
[5]
Yuqing Wang, Yun Zhao, and Linda Petzold. An Empirical Study on the Robustness
of the Segment Anything Model (SAM). 2023. arXiv: 2305.06422 [cs.CV]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06422.
[6]
Mélisande Teng et al. Assessing SAM for Tree Crown Instance Segmentation from
Drone Imagery. 2025. arXiv: 2503.20199 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
20199.
[7]
Carmelo Scribano et al. Segment Anything for Satellite Imagery: A Strong Baseline
and a Regional Dataset for Automatic Field Delineation. 2025. arXiv: 2506.16318
[cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.16318.
[8]
Alexander Kirillov et al. Segment Anything. 2023. arXiv: 2304.02643 [cs.CV]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643.
[9]
Maciej A Mazurowski et al. “Segment anything model for medical image analysis:
an experimental study”. In: Medical Image Analysis 89 (2023), p. 102918.
[10]
Jie Deng et al. Joint Super­Resolution and Segmentation for 1­m Impervious Sur­
face Area Mapping in China’s Yangtze River Economic Belt. 2025. arXiv: 2505.05367
[cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.05367.
[11]
Shuting Yang et al. “Crop Classification Method Based on Optimal Feature Selection
and Hybrid CNN­RF Networks for Multi­Temporal Remote Sensing Imagery”. In:
Remote Sensing 12.19 (2020). ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12193119. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/19/3119.
[12]
Anil Mathur and Giles M. Foody. “Crop classification by support vector machine
with intelligently selected training data for an operational application”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Remote Sensing 29.8 (2008), pp. 2227–2240. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
01431160701395203.
[13]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
Supervision”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020 (2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2103.00020.
[14]
Meta AI — Segment Anything Dataset. https://ai.meta.com/datasets/segment-
anything/. accessed July 2025.
[15]
YouTube­VOS Dataset. https://youtube-vos.org/. accessed July 2025.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
63
==PAGE:70==
[16]
Chaitanya Ryali et al. “Hiera: A Hierarchical Vision Transformer without the Bells­
and­Whistles”. In: (2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00989.
[17]
Yanghao Li et al. “MViTv2: Improved Multiscale Vision Transformers for Classifica­
tion and Detection”. In: (2022). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01526.
[18]
Alexander Kirillov et al. “Segment Anything”. In: (2023). URL: https://ai.meta.com/
research/publications/segment-anything/.
[19]
Meta AI Research. Stability score logic in SAM 2’s automatic mask generator. https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/sam2/blob/main/sam2/utils/amg.py#L158. Line
158, accessed July 2025. 2024.
[20]
PyTorch Contributors. torch.optim.AdamW — PyTorch 2.8 documentation. Accessed:
2025­10­02. PyTorch. 2025. URL: https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/
torch.optim.AdamW.html.
[21]
Kehuan Song et al. STSeg – Complex Video Object Segmentation: The 1st Solution
for 4th PVUW MOSE Challenge. Tech. rep. Technical Report, 4th PVUW MOSE
Challenge. Xidian University, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08306.
[22]
Piper Wolters, Favyen Bastani, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Zooming Out on Zoom­
ing In: Advancing Super­Resolution for Remote Sensing. 2023. arXiv: 2311.18082
[cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18082.
[23]
Christian Ledig et al. “Photo­Realistic Single Image Super­Resolution Using a Gen­
erative Adversarial Network”. In: 2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04802.
[24]
Overlapping images between Open Images, Flickr30k, and COCO. https://storage.
googleapis.com/openimages/web/2022-06-21-overlaps-with-coco-and-flickr30k.html.
[Online; accessed 2025­10­11]. 2022.
[25]
Robin Rombach et al. “High­Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Mod­
els”. In: 2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752.
[26]
NumPy Developers. numpy.hanning — NumPy documentation. Accessed: 2025­
10­19. NumPy. 2025. URL: https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.
hanning.html.
[27]
Thomas Bertrand, Ronan Fablet, and Lionel Lucas. “Guidelines to Compare Se­
mantic Segmentation Maps of Earth Observation Images”. In: (2024). URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=10443941.
[28]
Long Chen et al. “SortedAP: Rethinking evaluation metrics for instance segmenta­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops (CVPRW). IEEE. 2023. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
04887.
[29]
J. M. Molina et al. “Advances in metrics for evaluating instance segmentation per­
formance”. In: (2025). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231225002565.
[30]
Xing Zi et al. “Visual and Text Prompt Segmentation: A Novel Multi­Model Frame­
work for Remote Sensing”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07911 (2025). URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2503.07911.
[31]
Robert M. Haralick, K. Shanmugam, and Its’Hak Dinstein. “Textural Features for
Image Classification”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(1973).
[32]
SeaDAS. Grey Level Co￿occurrence Matrix (GLCM) Operator. Accessed: October
2025. 2023. URL: https://seadas.gsfc.nasa.gov/help-9.0.0/operators/GLCM.html.
[33]
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing Data using t­SNE”. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research (2008). URL: urlhttps://www.researchgate.
net/publication/228339739_Viualizing_data_using_t-SNE.
64
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
==PAGE:71==
[34]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learn­
ing and Data Mining. Lecture notes, Spring 2023, version 1.0. Version for print. All
rights belong to the authors and DTU. 2023.
[35]
The scikit­learn developers. Regularized logistic loss — sklearn.linear_model.
Accessed: October 2025. scikit­learn. 2025.
[36]
Tsung­Yi Lin et al. “Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection”. In: IEEE. 2017. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02002.
[37]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System”. In:
2016. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.02754.
[38]
XGBoost Developers. Introduction to Boosted Trees. Accessed: 2025­10­30. XG­
Boost. 2025. URL: https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/model.html.
[39]
Mathias Zinnen. focal_loss_torch: Simple PyTorch implementation of focal loss.
https://github.com/mathiaszinnen/focal_loss_torch. Accessed: 2025­10­31. 2020.
[40]
Scott M Lundberg and Su­In Lee. “A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Pre­
dictions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol. 30. 2017.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07874.
[41]
Burr Settles. Active Learning Literature Survey. Tech. rep. 1648. University of Wisconsin­
Madison, Department of Computer Sciences, 2009.
[42]
Lukas Kondmann et al. DENETHOR: The Dynamic Earth NET dataset for Har­
monized, inter­Operable, analysis­Ready, daily crop monitoring from space. 2021.
URL: https://github.com/lukaskondmann/DENETHOR.
[43]
Sentinel­2 Bands — Sentinel Hub. https://custom-scripts.sentinel-hub.com/custom-
scripts/sentinel-2/bands/. [Online; accessed 2025­10­11]. 2025.
[44]
Planet Fusion Monitoring Datasheet. https://www.planet.com. [Online; accessed
11­Oct­2025]. 2019.
[45]
Rapeseed. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Accessed: 2025­10­23. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapeseed.
[46]
Umweltbundesamt (German Environment Agency). LW￿I￿1: Agrophenological phase
shifts — The onset of spring marked by apple blossom and winter rapeseed flower­
ing. https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/monitoring-on-das/cluster/agriculture/lw-
I-1/indicator. Accessed: YYYY­MM­DD. 2023.
[47]
Karla Müller et al. “Analysis of vegetation indices derived from hyperspectral reflec­
tion measurements for estimating crop canopy parameters of oilseed rape (Brassica
napus L.)” In: Biosystems Engineering 101.2 (2008), pp. 172–182. ISSN: 1537­
5110. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2008.07.004. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1537511008002146.
Assessment and usage of the segment anything model for semi­automatic labelling in precision agriculture
65
