==PAGE:1==
Worldwide CO2 and CH4 Reductions –
or Lack of Same
Author: Shadman Al Islam (s230053)
A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
at Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor: Anders Stockmarr
November 21, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The Paris Agreement calls for urgent action to limit global warming to well below 2 ° C,
ideally 1.5 ° C, by significantly cutting greenhouse gas emissions. To reach this target,
emissions must peak by 2025 and fall by 43% from 2005 levels by 2030. This thesis
explores whether we are on track to meet these goals by examining how CO2 and CH4
emissions cumulatively have developed globally and how they relate to industrial growth
and international climate commitments.
The analysis is based on data from Our World in Data, covering historical CO2 and CH4
emissions and GDP figures across countries. It looks at which countries are the biggest
emitters and how their emissions compare to their level of economic development. A key
part of the study is distinguishing between countries that have signed the Paris Agreement
and those that have not - by examining how far signatories have come toward meeting their
targets and what share of global emissions they’re responsible for. Emissions from non-
signatory countries are also analyzed and compared to their Paris-aligned counterparts.
Looking ahead, the thesis draws on climate projections and future development scenarios
to estimate what global temperature increases might look like if current trends continue.
The findings show clear gaps between ambition and action, with progress varying widely
between countries - especially among the world’s largest economies.
By connecting real-world data with climate goals, this study offers a clearer picture of
where we stand and what still needs to be done to stay within the limits set by the Paris
Agreement.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Anders
Stockmarr, for his invaluable guidance, support, and feedback throughout the course of this
thesis. Their insights and encouragement have been instrumental in shaping both the direc-
tion and depth of this work.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
1
Acknowledgements
2
1
Introduction
7
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Problem Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Research Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Aim of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Contribution of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Literature Review
10
2.1
Evolution of International Climate Governance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Global CO2 and CH4 Emissions: Trends and Drivers
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
The Paris Agreement: Design, Implementation and Assessment . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Industrial Development, Decoupling and Emission Inequality . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Synthesis and Identified Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Data Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Data Integration and Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Variable Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Analysis and Projection Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
Temperature Response Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Limitations of the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results and Analysis
25
4.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Top Emitters and the GDP–Emissions Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Progress of Paris Agreement Signatories Toward the 2030 Target . . . . . .
31
3
==PAGE:5==
4.4
Signatory and Non-signatory Emission Trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Long-run Emission Pathways and Temperature Implications
. . . . . . . .
38
5
Discussion
43
5.1
Interpreting global emission pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Why some signatories are on target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Why major signatories remain off target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Why non-signatories continue to increase emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Implications for global temperature outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.6
Moral responsibility and per-capita emission disparities . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.7
Consequences of exceeding 1.5◦C and 2◦C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
53
6.1
Summary of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
References
55
A Appendix A: Additional Data Tables
63
A.1
Country-Level Emission Forecasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
4.1
Global CO2 + CH4 emissions (2005–2022) relative to a Paris-consistent
2030 reduction pathway.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Shares of total CO2 + CH4 emissions among the top ten emitters in 2022.
.
27
4.3
Historical CO2 + CH4 emissions of the top ten emitters, 1980–2022. . . . .
28
4.4
GDP–emissions trajectories for the top ten emitters, 1980–2022. . . . . . .
29
4.5
Log–log relationship between GDP and CO2 + CH4 emissions for the top
ten emitters in 2022.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Total CO2 + CH4 emissions for Kyoto ratifiers and non-ratifiers, 2005–2022.
33
4.7
CO2 + CH4 emissions per capita and per unit GDP (bubble size = total
emissions) for Kyoto signatories and non-signatories in 2022. . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Top emitters: 2022 emissions, quadratic projections for 2030, and Paris-
consistent 2030 targets, grouped by Kyoto status. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.9
CO2 Emissions Forecasts for Selected Countries (2005–2030). Red dashed
line represents the 43% reduction target from 2005 levels by 2030. Non
signatries on the left and signatories on the right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.10 Per-capita CO2e emissions for signatories and non-signatories, historical
(2005–2022) and projected (2023–2100).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.11 Projected CO2e emissions for signatories, non-signatories, and the global
total (2005–2100). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.12 Projected global temperature rise relative to 2005, based on cumulative
emissions and a TCRE of 0.45 °C per 1000 Gt CO2e. Horizontal lines mark
the 1.5 °C and 2 °C thresholds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
4.1
Progress of Paris Agreement signatories toward a 43% reduction in CO2 +
CH4 emissions by 2030.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Climate change has become one of the most significant global challenges of the twenty-first
century. Scientific assessments by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
demonstrate that rising concentrations of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide
and methane, are the dominant drivers of observed warming trends (1). In response, gov-
ernments have attempted to coordinate international mitigation efforts through successive
agreements. The most recent and influential of these is the Paris Agreement, adopted in
2015, which calls for limiting global temperature rise to well below two degrees Celsius
while encouraging efforts to remain within one and a half degrees Celsius (2). To keep
the one-point-five-degree target within reach, the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) indicates that global emissions must fall by approximately
forty-three percent by 2030 (3).
1.2
Problem Context
Although the Paris Agreement achieved unprecedented levels of participation, global emis-
sion trends remain inconsistent with its temperature objectives. Several countries have
succeeded in slowing or reversing their emissions growth, whereas others continue to ex-
perience steady increases linked to industrial expansion, population growth or persistent
reliance on fossil fuels. These uneven trajectories contribute to a widening gap between
scientific mitigation requirements and the path produced by current global policies.
Comparing national behaviour under the Paris Agreement is difficult because nearly
all major emitters have joined it. As a result, distinctions based solely on Paris participa-
tion provide little analytical value. A more informative differentiation emerges from the
earlier Kyoto Protocol, which did not achieve universal ratification and therefore created
a clearer divide between countries that accepted binding commitments and those that did
7
==PAGE:9==
not. Although Kyoto’s targets are no longer in force, the divide between its signatories and
non-signatories offers useful insight into the historical behaviour and long-term mitigation
tendencies of different groups of countries. For this reason, Kyoto participation is used
in this thesis for comparative per-capita and per-GDP analyses, whereas the Paris Agree-
ment is evaluated in a global cumulative sense when assessing alignment with temperature
pathways.
1.3
Research Gap
Existing research provides extensive assessments of global emission trends and the effec-
tiveness of climate agreements. However, there is limited work that simultaneously consid-
ers carbon dioxide and methane across a long historical period while distinguishing coun-
tries based on their earlier commitments under Kyoto. Furthermore, few studies combine
historical trajectories with forward-looking projections extending to the end of the cen-
tury, and even fewer relate these projections directly to the reduction levels required for
one-point-five and two-degree pathways. This gap is important because global mitigation
success depends not only on current policy adoption but also on the structural patterns of
emissions behaviour that have developed over time.
1.4
Aim of the Thesis
The aim of this thesis is to analyse the evolution of global carbon dioxide and methane
emissions from 2005 to 2022, examining long-term patterns across countries with different
historical commitments. The study evaluates cumulative progress toward the Paris Agree-
ment goal, compares per-capita and per-GDP emissions using Kyoto participation status
and develops projections through 2100 to assess whether the world is on a pathway com-
patible with internationally recognised climate targets.
1.5
Research Questions
This thesis addresses the broader question of whether global efforts are on course to meet
the emission reduction targets associated with limiting warming to one and a half degrees
Celsius. To investigate this, the analysis is guided by the following research questions:
1. How have global CO2 and CH4 emissions evolved from 2005 to 2022, and which
countries or regions account for the largest shares of these emissions and How do
current emission trends compare with the industrial development trajectories of major
emitting countries?
8
==PAGE:10==
2. How are the Paris Agreement Signatory countries progressing toward the Paris Agree-
ment benchmarks, particularly the requirement for global emissions to fall by forty-
three percent below 2005 levels by 2030?
3. How do emissions and development patterns differ between Kyoto signatories and
non-signatories?
4. What long-term emission pathways emerge when projecting CO2 and CH4 trends to
the end of the century, and what implications do these pathways have for expected
future temperature rise?
1.6
Contribution of the Study
This thesis contributes to the existing literature by providing a combined analysis of carbon
dioxide and methane emissions across a wide range of countries, using harmonised global
datasets. It offers a structured comparison between Kyoto signatories and non-signatories
and places these findings within the broader context of the Paris Agreement’s global mit-
igation targets. In addition, the thesis develops empirical projection models extending to
the end of the century, thereby offering a forward-looking assessment of whether current
global patterns are consistent with scientifically defined pathways. The study therefore
delivers both descriptive and predictive insights that can support continued evaluation of
international climate policy.
9
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
Evolution of International Climate Governance
International climate governance has developed over more than three decades, shaped by
increasing scientific certainty about the role of human-caused greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions. The assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
have been central in this process. Early reports established that anthropogenic CO2 and
CH4 emissions were already altering the climate system, while the most recent assessments
provide near-certain attribution of observed warming to human activities (1; 4; 5). This
evolving scientific consensus created the political momentum for countries to negotiate co-
ordinated responses under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and its subsequent agreements.
The UNFCCC as a Foundational Framework
The UNFCCC, adopted in 1992, set out the basic legal and institutional architecture for
international climate cooperation (6). It introduced the principle of “common but differen-
tiated responsibilities and respective capabilities” (CBDR–RC), recognising that industri-
alised countries have contributed most to cumulative emissions and possess greater financial
and technological capacity to respond. Although the convention itself did not impose quan-
tified emission reduction obligations, it established climate change as a shared problem and
created the Conference of the Parties (COP) as the principal decision-making body.
The CBDR–RC principle is closely linked with evidence on historical emissions. Long-
term datasets such as the PRIMAP-hist series show that industrialised economies are re-
sponsible for the bulk of cumulative CO2 emissions since the mid-19th century (7). Anal-
yses of historical responsibility highlight the tension between developmental needs of low-
and middle-income countries and the mitigation obligations of high-income states (8).
These tensions have shaped debates on fairness, climate finance and technology transfer
since the early COPs.
10
==PAGE:12==
The Kyoto Protocol: First Binding Commitments
The Kyoto Protocol, adopted in 1997 and entering into force in 2005, was the first attempt
to translate the UNFCCC’s broad objectives into binding emission reduction commitments
(9). It required Annex I parties, composed mainly of industrialised countries, to reduce
their collective GHG emissions by roughly 5% below 1990 levels during the first commit-
ment period (2008–2012). Non-Annex I (developing) countries were not subject to binding
targets, consistent with CBDR–RC.
The design and outcomes of Kyoto have been widely debated. Victor argues that the
protocol suffered from structural weaknesses, including lack of participation by major emit-
ters and the absence of credible enforcement mechanisms (10). Böhringer’s policy analy-
sis similarly concludes that Kyoto’s fragmented participation and relatively modest targets
limited its environmental effectiveness (11). These critiques suggest that while Kyoto was
symbolically important, its practical impact on global emission trajectories was limited.
Kyoto’s Market Mechanisms
Kyoto introduced three flexibility mechanisms intended to lower mitigation costs and en-
courage cooperation: International Emissions Trading, Joint Implementation (JI) and the
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). The CDM, in particular, was designed to allow
Annex I countries to earn credits by financing emission reduction projects in developing
countries.
Empirical evaluations of the CDM have been critical. Schneider’s assessment concludes
that many projects did not meet the criterion of additionality, meaning that they would
likely have occurred in the absence of CDM support (12). Problems related to baseline-
setting, monitoring and uneven geographic distribution of projects further undermined the
mechanism’s environmental integrity. Nonetheless, experience with carbon markets under
Kyoto informed later discussions on market mechanisms under the Paris Agreement.
From Kyoto to Paris: A Shift in Governance Logic
By the early 2010s, it had become clear that Kyoto’s architecture was not sufficient to de-
liver the level of emission reductions required by emerging science (13). The Paris Agree-
ment, adopted in 2015, marks a major shift in governance logic. Rather than imposing
top-down targets on a subset of countries, The Paris Agreement is built around nationally
determined contributions (NDCs) submitted by all parties (2). This bottom-up design re-
flects both the political reality of securing near-universal participation and an attempt to
create a more flexible system that can ratchet up ambition over time.
The Paris Agreement aims to hold the increase in global average temperature to “well
below” 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature in-
11
==PAGE:13==
crease to 1.5 °C. The IPCC Special Report on 1.5 °C shows that even half a degree of
additional warming significantly increases climate impacts, especially for vulnerable pop-
ulations (4). However, early assessments of the initial NDCs concluded that they were not
collectively sufficient to meet these temperature goals (14). This gap between ambition and
required pathways is now a central focus of global climate governance.
Contemporary Assessments of Global Action
Since Paris, a number of organisations have tracked progress toward the agreement’s objec-
tives. UNEP’s annual Emissions Gap Reports compare projected emissions under current
policies and NDCs with pathways compatible with 1.5 °C or 2 °C, consistently finding a
substantial gap (15; 16). The IEA similarly uses scenario analysis to examine the trans-
formations required to reach net-zero CO2 emissions by mid-century (17; 18). These as-
sessments suggest that while policy momentum has increased, current measures remain
insufficient.
The Paris Agreement includes a global stocktake process that periodically assesses col-
lective progress and informs updates of NDCs (19). Independent initiatives such as Climate
Action Tracker and the State of Climate Action reports evaluate national policies and im-
plementation, often concluding that most major economies are not yet on pathways aligned
with the temperature goals (20; 21). Overall, the literature portrays a regime that has broad-
ened participation and raised ambition, but still faces a significant implementation deficit.
2.2
Global CO2 and CH4 Emissions: Trends and Drivers
Understanding historical and contemporary emission patterns is essential for assessing the
adequacy of international climate policy. The Global Carbon Project (GCP) provides de-
tailed reconstructions and projections of CO2 emissions, which are widely used in both
scientific and policy analysis. Its 2022 assessment reports that global fossil CO2 emis-
sions reached a new record level, following a brief decline associated with the COVID-19
pandemic (22). Earlier GCP work documented the acceleration of global emissions from
the early 2000s, driven largely by coal-based growth in rapidly industrialising economies
(23; 24).
Long-Term CO2 Emission Patterns
Long-run national emissions datasets such as PRIMAP-hist show that industrialised coun-
tries dominated emissions for most of the period since 1850, reflecting the historical ge-
ography of industrialisation (7). However, from the late 20th century onward, emissions
growth shifted toward emerging economies. Le Quéré et al. identify a subset of 18 devel-
12
==PAGE:14==
oped economies where CO2 emissions have declined over the past decade, attributing this
to a combination of renewable energy deployment, improvements in energy efficiency and
structural changes in the economy (25).
Sectoral breakdowns presented in IEA reports show that electricity and heat production,
industry and transport are the largest sources of fossil CO2 emissions globally (17). These
sectors are therefore central to any credible mitigation strategy. The IPCC mitigation as-
sessments reinforce this view, emphasising the need for deep decarbonisation of the power
sector and widespread electrification underpinned by low-carbon energy (5).
CH4 Emissions and Their Role in Near-Term Warming
While CO2 is the principal driver of long-term warming, methane (CH4) is critical for near-
term climate outcomes. The Global Methane Budget synthesises atmospheric observations
and inventory data to show that CH4 concentrations have risen markedly since 2000, with
major contributions from agriculture, fossil fuel extraction and waste (26). Nisbet et al.
highlight a particularly rapid increase in atmospheric methane between 2014 and 2017,
raising concerns that current policies are insufficient to curb these emissions (27).
Methane’s relatively short atmospheric lifetime means that mitigation can yield rapid
climate benefits. Shindell et al. demonstrate that measures targeting CH4 and other short-
lived climate pollutants can simultaneously reduce warming and produce significant health
and agricultural co-benefits (28). Building on this evidence, UNEP’s Global Methane As-
sessment argues that cost-effective interventions across fossil fuel systems, agriculture and
waste could reduce global methane emissions by up to 45% by 2030 (29). Empirical work
on the oil and gas sector indicates that actual methane leakage rates may be substantially
higher than previously estimated, suggesting considerable untapped mitigation potential
(30).
Socioeconomic Drivers: Kaya Identity and Emission Decomposition
The Kaya Identity provides a simple but influential framework for decomposing CO2 emis-
sions into four multiplicative components: population, GDP per capita, energy intensity
of GDP and carbon intensity of energy (31). This decomposition clarifies why emissions
tend to rise in economies experiencing rapid growth in population and per-capita income,
especially when energy systems remain dominated by fossil fuels.
Empirical studies using this framework reveal that while some high-income countries
have achieved relative or absolute decoupling of emissions from economic growth, global
emissions continue to increase (32). The IPCC and GCP assessments report that improve-
ments in energy and carbon intensity have so far been more than offset by growth in GDP
and population at the global level (13; 22). These findings highlight the scale of transfor-
mation required to align future emissions with Paris-consistent pathways.
13
==PAGE:15==
Inequality and Responsibility in Emissions
Recent research emphasises that emissions are highly unequal both between and within
countries. Chancel’s work on global carbon inequality shows that the top 10% of emit-
ters are responsible for a disproportionately large share of global CO2 emissions, while
the bottom 50% contribute relatively little (33; 34). Household-level studies in Europe
and elsewhere demonstrate that carbon footprints increase strongly with income, reflecting
differences in consumption patterns, housing and travel behaviour (35; 36).
Inequalities also manifest at the national level. Our World in Data and World Bank
datasets show clear disparities in both per-capita and cumulative emissions between high-
income and low-income countries (37; 38; 39). A combination of historical responsibility
and current capacity has therefore become central to debates over burden-sharing, climate
finance and the design of equitable mitigation strategies (8).
2.3
The Paris Agreement: Design, Implementation and
Assessment
The Paris Agreement formalised a fundamentally different approach to international climate
governance by combining a shared long-term temperature goal with a system of nationally
determined, rather than internationally imposed, mitigation commitments. Instead of pre-
scribing top-down emission reduction targets, the Agreement requires each Party to pre-
pare, communicate and maintain nationally determined contributions (NDCs) that embody
the “highest possible ambition” according to national circumstances (2). This flexibility
was intended to secure broad participation while recognising heterogeneous development
pathways. To strengthen accountability, the Agreement also established a transparency
framework and a periodic global stocktake to assess collective progress towards its temper-
ature goals (19).
NDCs and Ambition Cycles
The architecture of the Paris Agreement is explicitly iterative. Parties are expected to sub-
mit progressively more ambitious NDCs every five years, informed by scientific findings
and their own assessments of implementation challenges. Early analyses of the first round
of NDCs suggested that, even if fully implemented, global emissions would remain far
above trajectories compatible with limiting warming to 2 °C, let alone 1.5 °C (14; 4). Al-
though several countries strengthened their NDCs ahead of the 2021–2022 update cycle,
recent assessments by UNEP and other independent bodies continue to show that the world
remains off track for meeting either temperature target (15; 16; 21).
Independent evaluations reinforce this conclusion. Climate Action Tracker consistently
14
==PAGE:16==
categorises most major emitters’ policies as “insufficient” or “highly insufficient,” indi-
cating large gaps between announced targets and implemented measures (20). Höhne et
al. similarly find that while global climate policy has advanced in scope and coverage, its
aggregate effect is still inadequate to close the emissions gap identified by the IPCC and
UNEP (40). Together, these findings highlight the central importance of the Paris ambition
cycle, but also its dependence on domestic political will and institutional capacity.
Accountability and Transparency
To enhance trust and comparability, the Paris Agreement established an Enhanced Trans-
parency Framework under which Parties must regularly report their greenhouse gas inven-
tories and progress toward their NDCs (19). The global stocktake, conducted every five
years, synthesises these national reports with scientific evidence and inputs from non-state
actors. Unlike the Kyoto Protocol, however, Paris does not rely on legally binding targets
backed by sanctions. Instead, accountability operates through mechanisms such as peer
review, public scrutiny and normative pressure (2; 41).
Research evaluating the first global stocktake suggests that the process plays an impor-
tant signalling role by clearly documenting the gap between current action and the emis-
sions pathways required to meet the temperature goals (42). Whether these findings trans-
late into more ambitious and credible NDCs in the next cycle remains an open question,
and one that is closely connected to the broader political economy of climate action.
Mitigation Pathways Under Paris
Mitigation scenarios aligned with the Paris Agreement’s temperature goals consistently
show the need for rapid and far-reaching transformations across all major emitting sec-
tors. IPCC pathways that limit warming to 1.5 °C or 2 °C require steep declines in CO2
emissions, combined with substantial reductions in CH4 and other non-CO2 gases (5; 43).
The IEA’s “Net Zero by 2050” roadmap similarly describes a transition involving near-
complete decarbonization of the power sector, accelerated electrification of transport and
industry, and significant improvements in energy efficiency (18).
The UNFCCC underscores the urgency of this transformation by noting that, to keep
the 1.5 °C goal within reach, global greenhouse gas emissions must fall by roughly 43 %
by 2030 of 2005 level (3). This benchmark illustrates the scale of the challenge, particu-
larly when contrasted with the trajectory implied by existing national policies. Independent
modeling studies and emissions gap assessments consistently show that current policies
lead to warming levels well above Paris temperature thresholds (16; 21). This persistent
implementation gap is a core motivation for the empirical analysis presented in this thesis.
15
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Industrial Development, Decoupling and Emission In-
equality
Emissions patterns are closely linked to industrial development and structural change in
the global economy. Classical environmental economics debates have explored whether
environmental pressures follow an Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC), rising in early
stages of development and later declining as income levels increase and environmental
regulation strengthens (44). For local pollutants, some evidence supports this pattern, but
for global pollutants such as CO2 the evidence is mixed. Stern’s review concludes that there
is limited support for a strong EKC-style decline in CO2 at high income levels, especially
when consumption-based emissions are considered (44).
Energy Use, Industrialisation and Emissions
Industrialisation and economic growth have historically been tightly coupled with energy
consumption and CO2 emissions. Studies of OECD and G7 countries show that financial
development and economic expansion tend to increase energy use and emissions unless ac-
companied by strong efficiency gains and fuel switching (45). At the global level, IEA and
IPCC assessments emphasize that without structural changes in energy systems, continued
industrial growth in emerging economies is likely to lock in carbon-intensive infrastructures
(17; 5).
Carbon Inequality and Development Pathways
The distribution of emissions across households and countries raises important questions
about equity and responsibility. Chancel finds that the top decile of global emitters accounts
for nearly half of global CO2 emissions, while the bottom half contributes a relatively small
share (33; 34). Studies of household-level footprints in Europe show similarly skewed
distributions, with high-income households driving a disproportionate share of emissions
from transport, housing and consumption (35; 36).
These patterns are mirrored in cross-country comparisons. Data from Our World in
Data and World Bank sources demonstrate stark differences in per-capita and cumulative
emissions between high-income and low-income regions (37; 38; 39). Historical responsi-
bility analyses argue that equitable burden-sharing should take these disparities into account
when setting mitigation commitments and designing climate finance mechanisms (8; 46).
16
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Synthesis and Identified Gaps
The literature reviewed in this chapter highlights several key points relevant for the present
thesis. First, the evolution of international climate governance from the UNFCCC through
Kyoto to Paris reflects a gradual shift from narrow, top-down burden-sharing among in-
dustrialised countries towards a more inclusive but more complex system of nationally de-
termined commitments. While this has broadened participation, it has also produced new
challenges in ensuring that aggregate ambition remains aligned with scientific requirements
(2; 14; 16).
Then, empirical assessments of CO2 and CH4 emissions show that global emissions
continue to rise, notwithstanding signs of decoupling in some developed economies. The
Global Carbon Budget and Global Methane Budget provide strong evidence that current
trajectories are inconsistent with pathways limiting warming to 1.5 °C or even 2 °C (22;
26). Short-lived climate pollutants such as methane have significant potential for near-term
mitigation, yet policy responses remain uneven and, in many cases, insufficient (29; 30).
In addition, industrial development and socioeconomic factors play a central role in
shaping emissions. The literature on the Kaya Identity, EKC and decoupling suggests
that while some countries have managed to reduce emissions while maintaining economic
growth, this trend is neither universal nor guaranteed (44; 32). Moreover, the growing focus
on consumption-based emissions and carbon inequality reveals deep asymmetries in both
responsibility and capacity, raising important equity questions that feed back into interna-
tional negotiations (33; 34; 37).
Finally, the reviewed literature reveals several gaps that this thesis aims to address.
Many global assessments focus primarily on CO2, with comparatively less emphasis on the
combined role of CO2 and CH4 in determining near- and long-term warming trajectories.
By analysing worldwide CO2 and CH4 emissions in relation to industrial development,
Paris participation status and projected temperature outcomes, this thesis seeks to contribute
to a more nuanced understanding of global mitigation efforts and the remaining gaps to
achieving the Paris goals.
17
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Overview
This chapter describes the data sources, preprocessing steps and modelling procedures used
to analyse global emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). The methodol-
ogy combines historical emissions data with regression-based projections and a simplified
temperature response model to estimate future warming under current trends.
3.2
Data Sources
CO2 data (Our World in Data →Global Carbon Project). CO2 emissions were ob-
tained from the “CO2 and Greenhouse Gas Emissions” dataset hosted by Our World in Data
(OWID). OWID compiles its CO2 data directly from the Global Carbon Project (GCP),
specifically the annual Global Carbon Budget. The GCP integrates multiple sources, in-
cluding international energy statistics (IEA, BP and UN energy balances), cement and in-
dustrial process emissions (CDIAC legacy datasets) and land-use change models. OWID
harmonises country names and formats but does not modify the underlying estimates (47;
48).
Methane data (Our World in Data →EDGAR). CH4 emissions were taken from
OWID’s methane emissions dataset, which repackages estimates from the Emissions Database
for Global Atmospheric Research (EDGAR v7.0). EDGAR is produced by the European
Commission Joint Research Centre and provides annual country-level methane inventories
derived from atmospheric measurements, agricultural statistics, waste-sector data and fossil
fuel extraction reporting (49; 50).
Conversion of CH4 to CO2-equivalent. To enable a combined assessment of gases,
methane emissions were converted to CO2-equivalent values using the 100-year Global
Warming Potential from IPCC AR6. The GWP100 for methane is 27.2. The conversion
follows:
18
==PAGE:20==
CO2eCH4 = CH4 × 27.2.
This factor is consistent with the latest physical-science assessment of greenhouse gas
forcing (1).
Kyoto Protocol signatory classification. Countries were classified as “signatory” or
“non-signatory” based on the official UNFCCC list of parties to the Kyoto Protocol (51).
The list distinguishes between countries that ratified the treaty and those that did not. This
classification was merged into the emissions dataset and used for per-capita and emissions-
intensity comparisons, where Kyoto status provides meaningful variation in mitigation be-
haviour.
It is worth noting that the emissions data follow the territorial accounting method, mean-
ing emissions are attributed to the country in which they are produced. As such, this ap-
proach does not account for emissions embedded in imported goods. In addition, emissions
from international aviation and shipping are excluded from national totals but are included
in the global aggregate.
3.3
Data Integration and Pre-processing
Merging datasets. The CO2, CH4 and Kyoto status datasets were merged by country name
and year. Country names were standardised manually where necessary. After merging, the
main variables included country, year, population, GDP, CO2, CH4-converted CO2e and
Kyoto status.
Time-window selection. Although OWID provides CO2 data back to 1750, CH4 data
are only consistently available from the late twentieth century. To ensure comparability
across gases, the analysis was restricted to the period 1980–2022. Observations for 2023
were excluded because multiple countries lacked complete methane and population data for
that year.
Handling missing values. Countries with substantial missing observations between
1980 and 2022 were removed. These were typically small emitters whose exclusion does
not materially affect global or regional emission patterns. Only countries with complete
CO2 and CH4-equivalent data over the analysis window were retained.
3.4
Variable Construction
Combined CO2-equivalent emissions. Total annual greenhouse gas emissions were com-
puted as:
ECO2e
t
= CO2,t + CO2eCH4,t.
19
==PAGE:21==
Per-capita and per-GDP emissions. Per-capita emissions were calculated by dividing
CO2e by annual population. Emissions intensity was calculated by dividing CO2e by GDP.
These metrics were used to compare Kyoto signatory and non-signatory groups.
3.5
Analysis and Projection Model
Log–Log Transformation for Cross-Sectional Analysis
When examining the relationship between GDP and total CO2-equivalent emissions across
countries, a log–log transformation was applied. This transformation is commonly used in
environmental and economic analysis to stabilise variance and to allow proportional rela-
tionships to be interpreted as linear in logarithmic space. The transformation is particularly
appropriate when variables span several orders of magnitude, as is the case for both GDP
and national emissions. Using a log–log specification avoids visual distortion caused by ex-
treme values and provides a clearer representation of scaling behaviour among large emit-
ters. This choice affects only the descriptive cross-sectional analysis and does not modify
the underlying emissions or GDP data used in the projection models.
Polynomial Regression Specification
Quadratic regression. Future emissions were modelled using a second-order polynomial
regression fitted to annual data from 1980 to 2022:
Et = α + β1t + β2t2 + εt,
where Et denotes annual emissions in year t, and the parameters α, β1 and β2 were
estimated using ordinary least squares.
A simplified implementation of the model in R is:
model <- lm(value ~ poly(year, 2, raw = TRUE), data = fit_data)
Short-term projection (to 2030)
The fitted model was evaluated for future years t = 2023, . . . , 2030 to estimate whether
expected emissions align with the Paris Agreement benchmark of a 43% reduction from
2005 levels.
predict(model, newdata = data.frame(year = 2023:2030))
Long-term projection (to 2100)
The same polynomial model was extended to t = 2031, . . . , 2100 to evaluate long-run
emissions under a continuation of current trends. These projections were used to calculate
cumulative emissions.
20
==PAGE:22==
Model Selection and Rationale
The choice of a second–order polynomial regression model for projecting future CO2-
equivalent emissions was guided by a combination of empirical observation, data limita-
tions, and methodological transparency. This subsection outlines the considerations that
motivated this model choice and explains why alternative modelling approaches were not
adopted for this study.
Rationale for using the Kyoto signatory distinction. The decision to distinguish
countries based on their participation in the Kyoto Protocol is grounded in the observa-
tion that this agreement represents the first internationally binding commitment to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. Countries that ratified Kyoto effectively signalled a willing-
ness to adopt legally enforceable mitigation targets, accept external monitoring, and align
national policies with collective climate goals. This makes Kyoto ratification not merely
a historical detail, but a meaningful indicator of early climate ambition and institutional
readiness to decarbonise. In contrast, non-signatory countries either declined to adopt bind-
ing obligations or lacked the institutional or political capacity to do so, suggesting a lower
prioritisation of emissions reduction during the period in which global climate governance
was taking shape. Using Kyoto participation as a grouping variable therefore captures an
important behavioural and policy distinction: signatories tend to exhibit stronger long-term
commitments to climate mitigation, whereas non-signatories have historically prioritised
economic development and energy expansion over binding climate measures. This distinc-
tion aligns closely with the divergence observed in the emissions data and provides a more
policy-relevant framework for analysing future trajectories than alternative classifications
based purely on geography or income level.
Suitability for annual emissions data. The dataset used in this thesis consists of an-
nual country-level emissions observations spanning 1980–2022. With approximately forty
data points per country, the time series is relatively short and exhibits gradual, multi-year
movements rather than sharp cyclical behaviour. Under these conditions, higher-complexity
forecasting techniques such as neural networks or long-memory autoregressive models of-
fer little practical advantage and can be unstable when fitted to short series. In contrast, a
second-order polynomial regression provides a smooth, flexible representation of medium-
term trends while remaining statistically well-behaved given the available sample size.
Capturing curvature without overfitting. Exploratory analysis of historical emis-
sions revealed that many countries exhibit non-linear long-run patterns: for example, rapid
increases during industrial expansion, slower increases or plateaus during economic transi-
tions, and in some cases early-stage declines associated with policy interventions. A linear
model was therefore insufficient, as it systematically underestimates curvature present in
the historical data. At the same time, polynomials of order three or higher can produce un-
realistic oscillations outside the observed data range and are sensitive to small fluctuations
21
==PAGE:23==
in the input series. A quadratic specification strikes a balance by allowing a single turning
point while avoiding implausible long-term divergence. This feature is particularly impor-
tant when projections are extended to 2030 and 2100, because high-degree polynomials
tend to generate unstable behaviour far from the observed interval.
Interpretability and transparency. A further advantage of the quadratic model is in-
terpretability. The fitted coefficients have a clear meaning in terms of the long-run direction
and curvature of the emissions trajectory, allowing the results to be communicated in a
way that is understandable to policy analysts and non-technical audiences. More complex
approaches such as random forests, boosted trees or neural networks operate as black-box
models and are harder to justify within the context of international climate policy analysis,
where transparency is often a requirement.
Cross-country comparability. Since the study involves separate projections for more
than one hundred countries, it was essential to employ a modelling framework that is ap-
plied consistently across the entire dataset. Models that require country-specific hyperpa-
rameter tuning such as ARIMA, structural time-series models, or machine learning methods
would produce projections that are not directly comparable. A quadratic regression, fitted
uniformly to each country’s historical series, ensures methodological consistency across
all cases. This uniformity also facilitates group-level comparisons, such as Kyoto Protocol
signatories versus non-signatories.
ARIMA model’s appropriateness in this context.
Although ARIMA models are
widely used for time-series forecasting, they are not well suited to the structure of green-
house gas emissions. ARIMA does not require the original series to be stationary; instead,
it achieves stationarity by differencing the data, which removes long-run trends and focuses
the model on short-term fluctuations. For emissions, however, the long-run trajectory is
precisely the feature of interest: it reflects structural forces such as industrial development,
energy transitions, and policy changes. Differencing the series would strip away this long-
run information and produce forecasts driven primarily by short-run noise rather than by
the underlying trend. In contrast, a simple polynomial trend model preserves the structural
component of the series and provides a transparent representation of the long-run behaviour
that is relevant for cumulative emissions and temperature outcomes.
Compatibility with long-run cumulative emissions analysis. One of the objectives
of this thesis is to estimate cumulative global CO2-equivalent emissions to the year 2100
in order to evaluate warming outcomes using the transient climate response to cumulative
emissions (TCRE). For cumulative analysis, the stability and smoothness of the emission
trajectory are crucial; erratic projections would compound over time and distort cumulative
totals. The quadratic model’s smooth trajectory ensures that cumulative emissions remain
coherent and interpretable, which is essential for linking the emissions pathway to temper-
ature outcomes.
Computational robustness and reproducibility. The polynomial specification is com-
22
==PAGE:24==
putationally simple and robust to missing years, minor noise, and small deviations in the
input series. This reliability is important when applying the model to a diverse set of coun-
tries with different emission patterns and data constraints. The choice of a simple, well
understood model also supports reproducibility, a key requirement for empirical climate
analysis. All projections can be regenerated directly from the underlying data without the
need for complex optimisation routines or specialised software dependencies.
The second-order polynomial model was selected because it (i) captures non-linear his-
torical trends, (ii) avoids the instability associated with higher-order polynomials and com-
plex machine learning models, (iii) remains transparent and easy to interpret, (iv) supports
consistent cross-country comparisons, and (v) provides smooth projections suitable for cu-
mulative emissions and temperature modelling.
3.6
Temperature Response Model
Cumulative emissions. Cumulative CO2-equivalent emissions were required for tempera-
ture estimation and were computed as:
Ct =
t
X
τ=1980
ECO2e
τ
.
Transient Climate Response to Cumulative Emissions (TCRE). The temperature
implications of cumulative emissions were estimated using the linear TCRE relationship
from IPCC AR6, which assigns approximately 0.45◦C of warming per 1000 gigatonnes of
CO2 emitted (52):
∆Tt = 0.45 ×
Ct
1000.
This was implemented in R as:
global_temp <- global_proj %>%
mutate(cumulative_gt = cumsum(total_gt),
temp_rise_C
= cumulative_gt * 0.45 / 1000)
3.7
Limitations of the Data
While the dataset used in this thesis is extensive and sourced from reputable institutions, it
is important to acknowledge several limitations that may affect the scope and interpretation
of the findings.
First, the dataset is based on territorial emissions, meaning that CO2 emissions are attributed
to the country where they physically occur. This method does not account for emissions
23
==PAGE:25==
embedded in international trade - for example, emissions generated during the production
of goods that are later exported. As a result, high-consuming countries that outsource their
manufacturing may appear to have lower emissions than they actually drive indirectly.
Second, emissions from international aviation and shipping are excluded from national
totals and are only reflected in the global aggregate. This omission can slightly distort the
emissions profile of countries with large aviation or maritime industries.
Third, while the dataset is generally complete for major indicators like total and per
capita CO2 emissions, some variables had limited coverage across countries and years. To
maintain consistency and avoid the use of highly incomplete data, several columns were
removed during preprocessing. This means that potentially insightful variables, such as
emissions by sector or detailed energy source breakdowns, were excluded if they lacked
adequate data across time and geography.
Another limitation lies in the availability of updated emissions data. While most coun-
tries report recent figures, some reporting lags exist, particularly for less developed nations
or those with limited data infrastructure. This can result in temporary gaps or reliance on
estimates in the most recent years of the dataset.
Finally, although Our World in Data performs careful standardization and documenta-
tion, there is always some uncertainty involved in long-run datasets compiled from multiple
sources. Historical data in particular - including older population estimates or early emis-
sions records - may be subject to revision or may not fully reflect the realities on the ground.
Despite these limitations, the dataset remains one of the most comprehensive and ac-
cessible sources available for analyzing global CO2 emissions in relation to economic and
policy trends. All analytical decisions were made with these constraints in mind, and the
conclusions drawn in this thesis should be interpreted accordingly.
24
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4
Results and Analysis
4.1
Overview
This chapter presents the empirical results of the study and evaluates global progress toward
the Paris Agreement’s 2030 emission-reduction benchmark. The analysis draws on the
harmonised dataset described in Chapter 3, which brings together production-based CO2
emissions, methane emissions converted to CO2-equivalent, GDP, population, and Kyoto
Protocol participation status for all countries with complete data from 1980 onward. The
results are organised into thematic sections that progress from broad global patterns to more
detailed country-level assessments.
Figure 4.1: Global CO2 + CH4 emissions (2005–2022) relative to a Paris-consistent 2030
reduction pathway.
To understand the global picture at first, figure 4.1 plots total world CO2 and CH4 emis-
25
==PAGE:27==
sions from 2005 to 2022 and compares them with the emissions pathway that would be
compatible with the Paris requirement of a forty three percent reduction from 2005 levels
by 2030. The divergence between the observed trajectory and the reduction pathway is
already substantial by the mid-2010s and widens further in the 2020s. Rather than falling,
global emissions have continued to rise, with only temporary dips during the financial crisis
and the pandemic years. This global context provides the backdrop for the more granular
analysis that follows, since the world as a whole is not on a Paris-consistent path even
before country differences are examined.
With the global trend established, the chapter proceeds in four steps. First, it examines
the distribution of emissions among the highest-emitting countries and describes how their
contributions have evolved since 1980. Understanding the behaviour of these large emitters
is essential, as their combined output dominates the global total.
Second, the analysis compares countries that ratified the Kyoto Protocol with those that
did not. Although nearly all nations are now Parties to the Paris Agreement, this earlier
division provides a useful lens through which to examine long-term structural differences
in emissions intensity, development patterns and historical mitigation commitments.
Third, the chapter evaluates projected emissions to 2030 using the polynomial models
introduced in Chapter 3. These projections are assessed against a quantitative interpretation
of the Paris benchmark, allowing an identification of which signatories appear on track and
which remain off course.
Finally, the chapter extends the horizon to 2100 by translating cumulative projected
emissions into temperature implications through the Transient Climate Response to Cumu-
lative Emissions (TCRE) relationship. These long-term projections situate current national
trajectories within the broader question of whether global warming can realistically be lim-
ited to 1.5◦C or 2◦C under present trends.
Taken together, the results provide a structured assessment of historical patterns, short-
term prospects and long-term consequences, forming the foundation for the discussion in
Chapter 5 on the extent to which the world is progressing toward its stated climate goals.
4.2
Top Emitters and the GDP–Emissions Relationship
A small group of countries dominate global greenhouse gas output, and their long-term
development patterns largely determine the direction of global emissions. Before assessing
projected pathways or progress toward the Paris Agreement, it is necessary to understand
how emissions are distributed among these major contributors and how their economic
trajectories connect to changes in CO2 and CH4 emissions.
26
==PAGE:28==
Largest Emitters in 2022
The distribution of emissions in 2022 is highly concentrated. China is the largest emitter by
a wide margin, followed by the United States and India, with the remaining major contribu-
tors including Russia, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Germany. Together,
these ten countries account for a decisive share of global CO2 and CH4 emissions. Their
collective influence is illustrated in Figure 4.2, which shows their proportional contributions
relative to the global total.
Figure 4.2: Shares of total CO2 + CH4 emissions among the top ten emitters in 2022.
The asymmetry in the distribution is striking. China alone accounts for a substantial
portion of emissions within this group, and the combined output of the top three emitters
outweighs that of the remaining seven. Moreover the top 5 emitters emit more than half of
the emissions than all other countries combined. This concentration highlights why large
emitters are central to any credible global mitigation strategy.
Historical Emission Patterns, 1980–2022
The evolution of emissions over the past four decades reveals how differently these economies
have developed. Figure 4.3 presents the historical contributions of the same ten countries
from 1980 to 2022. The visual pattern shows long-running increases among emerging
economies, contrasted with stabilisation or gradual declines among several industrialised
nations.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Historical CO2 + CH4 emissions of the top ten emitters, 1980–2022.
China’s rapid growth after the turn of the century is the most prominent feature in the
period. India and Indonesia follow similar upward trends, though at smaller scales. Rus-
sia’s trajectory fluctuates substantially, reflecting both economic restructuring and shifts in
global energy markets. In contrast, emissions from Germany and Japan have generally de-
clined or remained stable despite continued economic activity, indicating structural changes
and improvements in energy efficiency. The United States also shows a long plateau fol-
lowed by a gradual decrease over the past fifteen years.
These historical differences suggest that the connection between development and emis-
sions depends strongly on a country’s stage of industrialisation, energy composition and
policy environment.
Economic Growth and Emissions: Trajectories Over Time
To examine the relationship between economic development and emissions more directly,
Figure 4.4 traces how emissions changed as each country’s GDP expanded. Each path
represents more than four decades of development and makes it possible to distinguish
between economies that remain tightly bound to emissions-intensive growth and those that
have begun to decouple.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: GDP–emissions trajectories for the top ten emitters, 1980–2022.
China, India and Indonesia display a strong positive association between rising GDP
and increasing emissions. Their development paths indicate that economic expansion con-
tinues to rely heavily on energy- and resource-intensive production. Iran and Saudi Arabia
show similar behaviour, shaped largely by the dominance of hydrocarbon industries.
The trajectories of several industrialised economies differ markedly. Germany shows a
pronounced downward slope in emissions despite steady economic growth, demonstrating
clear evidence of relative decoupling. Japan follows a similar pattern on a smaller scale,
and the United States shows gradual decoupling beginning in the mid-2000s. These shifts
reflect long-term energy transitions, efficiency gains and changes in sectoral composition.
Taken together, these trajectories illustrate that the relationship between GDP and emis-
sions is not uniform; instead, it evolves with structural changes in the economy, policy
interventions and shifts in energy systems.
Cross-Sectional Relationship in 2022
A complementary way to study the connection between economic activity and emissions is
to compare countries at a single point in time. The log–log scatterplot in Figure 4.5 presents
the association between GDP and total CO2 + CH4 emissions in 2022 for the same group
of major emitters.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.5: Log–log relationship between GDP and CO2 + CH4 emissions for the top ten
emitters in 2022.
A nearly linear pattern appears in logarithmic space, indicating that emissions tend to
scale predictably with economic size. China and the United States sit at the high end of both
GDP and emissions, while India and Indonesia fall close to the fitted trendline. Germany
lies well below the line, reflecting significantly lower emissions relative to its economic
output. Russia and Saudi Arabia lie above the line, signalling higher emissions intensity
linked to energy production and export-oriented hydrocarbon sectors.
The combined evidence from the temporal trajectories and cross-sectional scaling rein-
forces a familiar but important conclusion: while several advanced economies have made
progress in reducing emissions without sacrificing economic performance, the world’s large
emerging economies continue to exhibit emissions-intensive growth patterns. Their future
development choices therefore carry substantial implications for global climate outcomes.
30
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Progress of Paris Agreement Signatories Toward the
2030 Target
Table 4.1: Progress of Paris Agreement signatories toward a 43% reduction in CO2 + CH4
emissions by 2030.
Country
2005–2022
2005–2030
2030
change (%) predicted (%)
target
Belgium
-28.0%
-48.2%
On target
Denmark
-36.4%
-81.2%
On target
Finland
-40.2%
-78.6%
On target
Greece
-47.6%
-92.4%
On target
Ireland
-20.6%
-43.3%
On target
Italy
-31.0%
-65.6%
On target
Portugal
-35.7%
-73.2%
On target
Spain
-32.2%
-55.0%
On target
Sweden
-25.1%
-44.2%
On target
UK
-44.7%
-79.5%
On target
Australia
-3.6%
-6.1% Off target
Austria
-21.2%
-31.7% Off target
Bulgaria
-7.7%
-2.5% Off target
Canada
-4.3%
-9.2% Off target
Croatia
-24.4%
-33.4% Off target
Estonia
-31.5%
1.5% Off target
France
-27.5%
-36.0% Off target
Germany
-23.4%
-33.1% Off target
Country
2005–2022
2005–2030
2030
change (%) predicted (%)
target
Hungary
-23.7%
-21.0% Off target
Iceland
15.4%
21.1% Off target
Japan
-20.1%
-37.6% Off target
Latvia
-12.6%
55.5% Off target
Lithuania
-14.9%
34.6% Off target
Luxembourg
-38.2%
-41.0% Off target
Netherlands
-28.4%
-41.5% Off target
New Zealand
-10.8%
-13.3% Off target
Norway
-6.9%
-19.4% Off target
Poland
-6.6%
4.4% Off target
Romania
-23.3%
-6.7% Off target
Russia
18.4%
35.8% Off target
Slovakia
-24.5%
-17.2% Off target
Slovenia
-25.7%
-38.9% Off target
Switzerland
-24.7%
-39.4% Off target
Ukraine
-50.1%
-34.5% Off target
United States
-15.9%
-33.7% Off target
Note: The countries listed here represent the Kyoto Protocol ratifiers for which complete
CO2 and CH4 data (1980–2022) are available, and therefore do not constitute the full set
of Paris Agreement signatories.
The Paris Agreement specifies that global greenhouse gas emissions should fall by about
43% from 2005 levels by 2030 if the 1.5 ◦C limit is to remain within reach. In the empirical
work of this thesis, a country is classified as “on target” when the modelled reduction in
combined CO2 and CH4 emissions between 2005 and 2030 reaches at least 43%; all other
signatories are labelled “off target”. Table 4.1 summarises the historical reductions achieved
up to 2022 and the predicted change to 2030 for the main Paris signatories included in the
dataset.
A first observation is that only a small group of countries satisfy the 43% benchmark
31
==PAGE:33==
under the polynomial projection. Ten signatories fall into the “on target” category: Bel-
gium, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United
Kingdom. All are high-income European economies that already reduced emissions sub-
stantially between 2005 and 2022, with observed cuts ranging from around 21% in Ireland
to more than 47% in Greece. In every case, the fitted 2030 trajectory implies a further
decline, pushing total reductions well beyond the Paris threshold. For Denmark, Finland,
Greece and the United Kingdom the predicted reductions exceed 75%, reflecting long-
standing decarbonisation trends in the power sector and improvements in energy efficiency.
The remaining signatories in the table are classified as off target. Several have made
noticeable progress since 2005, but their projected 2030 reductions fall short of the 43%
benchmark. France and Germany, for example, reduce emissions by 27.5% and 23.4%
respectively up to 2022, with modelled values of around 36% and 33% by 2030. Austria,
the Netherlands and Switzerland show patterns of moderate cuts that flatten out before
reaching the required level. Countries such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Norway
reduce emissions only slightly in the historical period and are projected to achieve less than
a 20% reduction by 2030, leaving them far from a Paris-consistent pathway.
A smaller subset of signatories show essentially no progress, or even an increase, rela-
tive to 2005. Poland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Russia all have projected 2030 emis-
sions that are similar to or higher than their 2005 levels. In these cases, the polynomial fit
captures both limited historical reductions and recent upward trends. Iceland and Russia
stand out in particular, with positive historical and projected changes, indicating that emis-
sions are higher than in 2005 and expected to continue rising along current trajectories. For
Ukraine, the model reflects a very large historical reduction, driven mainly by economic
contraction and, more recently, war-related disruption, but the projected decline by 2030
still does not reach the 43% threshold.
The United States occupies an intermediate position. Emissions fall by about 16% be-
tween 2005 and 2022, and the model suggests a reduction of roughly 34% by 2030 if recent
trends continue. This represents significant progress compared with the early 2000s, but
it remains clearly below the required Paris benchmark. In other words, even with ongo-
ing decarbonisation in the power sector, a continuation of historical patterns would not be
sufficient to reach a 43% cut in total CO2 and CH4 emissions.
Although several signatories achieve reductions that meet or exceed the Paris bench-
mark when projected to 2030, this group represents only a limited share of total global
emissions. The countries that fall into the on target category are primarily smaller Euro-
pean economies whose combined contribution is modest when compared with the world’s
largest emitters. By contrast, many of the high emitting signatories are among those that
remain off target, including the United States, Russia, Japan and Canada. As a result,
the advances made by the on target group are not sufficient to counterbalance the slower
progress or continuing increases in emissions among the larger economies. This imbalance
32
==PAGE:34==
underscores the importance of examining how signatories compare with non signatories,
and why the global trajectory continues to rise even as some countries move decisively
toward decarbonisation.
4.4
Signatory and Non-signatory Emission Trajectories
The division between countries that accepted binding commitments under the Kyoto Pro-
tocol and those that did not continues to reflect meaningful structural differences in global
emissions. Although the Paris Agreement now includes nearly all countries, the Kyoto split
remains useful as a proxy for distinguishing long-industrialised economies with earlier mit-
igation obligations from large emerging economies whose emissions growth accelerated
later. In this analysis, the signatory and non-signatory groups are defined on the basis of
Kyoto ratification, restricted to countries with consistent CO2 + CH4 data from 1980 on-
ward.
Group-level emission trends
Figure 4.6: Total CO2 + CH4 emissions for Kyoto ratifiers and non-ratifiers, 2005–2022.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.6 compares total CO2 + CH4 emissions for Kyoto ratifiers and non-ratifiers be-
tween 2005 and 2022. The two groups exhibit sharply divergent trajectories. Ratifying
countries show a broadly stable to moderately declining trend, with reductions after the
global financial crisis and again during the pandemic years. Non-signatory countries, by
contrast, display persistent growth across the entire period.
The divergence widens over time. In 2005, total emissions from the two groups were
closer in magnitude; by 2022, the non-signatory group clearly dominates global trends. This
indicates that reductions achieved in European and other Kyoto-participating countries are
outweighed by steady increases among large emerging emitters.
Cross-country emissions intensity and structural differences
China
United States
India
Russia
Japan
Iran
Indonesia
Germany
South Korea
Canada
Brazil
Mexico
Turkey
South Africa
Italy
3e−04
6e−04
9e−04
0
5
10
15
CO2 per Capita (tons/person)
CO2 per GDP (tons/USD)
Agreement Status
Ratified
Not Ratified
Unknown
Total CO2 (tons)
2.50e+09
5.00e+09
7.50e+09
1.00e+10
1.25e+10
Central range: 2%−95% on both axes
CO2 per Capita vs. CO2 per GDP (2022)
Figure 4.7: CO2 + CH4 emissions per capita and per unit GDP (bubble size = total emis-
sions) for Kyoto signatories and non-signatories in 2022.
To explore the structural roots of the widening gap between the two groups, Figure 4.7
compares three aspects of national emissions in 2022. Each point represents a country,
with its position determined by emissions per capita and emissions per unit of GDP, while
the bubble size reflects the scale of total CO2 and CH4 emissions. Taken together, the figure
provides a compact picture of how heavily countries emit on average, how carbon intensive
their productive sectors are, and how large their overall contribution to global emissions has
34
==PAGE:36==
become.
A broad pattern appears once the bubbles are examined. Most countries that ratified the
Kyoto Protocol are concentrated in the lower left portion of the figure. This part of the dis-
tribution contains economies where average per-person emissions are moderate and where
each unit of economic output is generated with relatively low carbon intensity. Many Euro-
pean Union member states fall into this category, as does Japan. Although these economies
remain substantial emitters in absolute terms, their position in the diagram reflects several
decades of gradual efficiency improvements, more diversified energy systems and, in some
cases, deliberate policy measures that have limited the growth of high-carbon industries.
The non-signatory group reveals a very different pattern. A large share of these coun-
tries occupy the upper and upper-right regions of the plot, where both emissions per capita
and emissions per unit of GDP are noticeably higher. China and India sit in this space,
reflecting their rapid industrial expansion and heavy reliance on coal and other fossil fuels.
Indonesia, Brazil and Saudi Arabia show similar characteristics, although each for slightly
different reasons such as energy mix, land-use emissions or sectoral composition. Sev-
eral of these countries also stand out because their bubble size is large, meaning that their
absolute emissions weigh heavily on the global total.
Two countries merit particular attention. The United States and Russia are technically
Kyoto ratifiers in a formal sense, yet their emissions profiles resemble those of the non-
signatory group more than those of the European and Japanese cluster. Both appear high
on the vertical axis and relatively far to the right, signalling a combination of considerable
per-capita emissions and persistent carbon intensity in key sectors. In Russia’s case, this
reflects a production structure dominated by energy extraction and heavy industry, while
for the United States it reflects a long-standing pattern of high energy consumption and a
slower shift away from fossil fuels.
Overall, the bubble chart highlights that the divergence between the two groups is not
simply a matter of scale or population size. It reflects deeper structural and developmental
differences which shape how economies produce, consume and grow. These differences
help explain why reductions among Kyoto ratifiers have not translated into a substantial
decline in global emissions and why the upward momentum among the non-signatory group
continues to dominate the global trend.
35
==PAGE:37==
2030 trajectories of major emitters
Figure 4.8: Top emitters: 2022 emissions, quadratic projections for 2030, and Paris-
consistent 2030 targets, grouped by Kyoto status.
The contrast becomes even more pronounced when projecting emissions to 2030. Fig-
ure 4.8 compares three quantities for the largest emitters: 2022 emissions, quadratic pro-
jections for 2030, and the Paris-consistent target (43% below 2005 levels).
Among non-signatories, projected 2030 values exceed both their 2022 emissions and
the Paris-consistent target. China and India, in particular, show upward trajectories that
continue well into the 2020s. Indonesia, Brazil, Iran, Saudi Arabia and South Africa follow
a similar pattern. None of these countries approach the required 2030 reduction pathway
under current trends.
On the signatory side, the picture is more heterogeneous. Some EU economies ex-
hibit projected reductions largely aligned with their target pathways, whereas the United
States, Russia, Japan and Canada remain substantially above the Paris-consistent bench-
mark. These differences reflect the diversity of domestic policy commitments and economic
structures, even within the signatory group.
36
==PAGE:38==
Country-level trajectories toward 2030
A closer inspection of individual emission pathways helps clarify the structural differences
highlighted in the group-level comparison. Figure 4.9 presents historical and projected
emissions for six countries that did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol and six signatories that
represent some of the most relevant cases for understanding global trends. The projected
values are based on the polynomial models introduced in Chapter 3, and the red reference
line shows the reduction required for consistency with the Paris benchmark of a 43 percent
decline from 2005 levels by 2030.
Figure 4.9: CO2 Emissions Forecasts for Selected Countries (2005–2030). Red dashed line
represents the 43% reduction target from 2005 levels by 2030. Non signatries on the left
and signatories on the right
The non signatory group displays a consistent pattern across all six cases. Emissions
rise steadily from 2005 to 2022 and the fitted curves continue this upward trend into the
remainder of the decade. China and India illustrate this most clearly. Their projected 2030
levels move substantially above both their 2022 values and the Paris-consistent pathway.
None of these countries approach the reduction profile implied by the Paris target under
current trends.
The signatory group presents a more diverse picture. Several European countries, in-
cluding Denmark, Germany, Spain and France, show clear downward trajectories in line
with long-term structural changes in their energy systems. The projected declines to 2030
bring some of these countries close to or even below the Paris-consistent reduction path.
Among these signatory contries, the United Kingdom and Denmark exhibit a strong and
sustained decline that continues into the projection period, reflecting a long-standing shift
37
==PAGE:39==
away from coal and improved efficiency in multiple sectors.
Together, these country-level trajectories reinforce the earlier findings. A few signato-
ries have made substantial progress toward the 2030 reduction threshold, but this progress
is offset by slow or negative movement among other major emitters. Among non signa-
tories, the projected pathways suggest that current policy and structural conditions are not
sufficient to deliver the required reductions within the remaining timeframe to 2030.
Full country-level emission projections are provided in Appendix A.
4.5
Long-run Emission Pathways and Temperature Impli-
cations
To understand how global emissions may evolve if recent historical patterns persist, this
section develops projections of future emissions for Kyoto signatory and non-signatory
countries. These projections build directly on the recorded emissions data presented ear-
lier and extrapolate them using simple trend models that reflect the differing historical be-
haviours of the two groups. No demographic assumptions or population forecasts are used;
all trends are driven solely by the observed emissions data.
Per-capita Emission Trends
For each year t from 2005 to 2022, per-capita emissions are constructed from the recorded
data as
eg
t = Eg
t
P g
t
,
(4.1)
where Eg
t denotes total CO2-equivalent emissions for group g ∈{signatories, non-signatories}
and P g
t is the corresponding population. These historical per-capita values form the basis
for the long-term projections.
Signatories.
For signatory countries, a second-order polynomial is fitted to the historical
per-capita trend:
ˆesig
t
= αsig + βsigt + γsigt2.
(4.2)
Because a raw quadratic can eventually turn upward, which would be inconsistent with
long-run decarbonisation, the projected series is constrained to be monotone non-increasing
from 2022 onwards:
esig
t
= min

ˆesig
t , esig
t−1

,
t ≥2023,
(4.3)
with values also constrained to remain non-negative. This produces a smooth decline fol-
lowed by a low plateau in the later decades.
38
==PAGE:40==
Non-signatories.
For non-signatories, the historical per-capita emissions have increased
steadily. A linear model is therefore fitted:
ˆenon
t
= αnon + βnont.
(4.4)
To avoid unrealistic year-to-year drops, the projected series is enforced to be monotone
non-decreasing:
enon
t
= max
 ˆenon
t , enon
t−1

,
t ≥2023.
(4.5)
The resulting series shows non-signatories continuing their gradual increase in per-capita
emissions throughout the projection horizon.
Figure 4.10: Per-capita CO2e emissions for signatories and non-signatories, historical
(2005–2022) and projected (2023–2100).
Modelling assumptions for long-run projections
The projections in this section rely on a small set of explicit behavioural assumptions that
reflect the historical differences between Kyoto signatory and non-signatory countries. For
the signatory group, the model assumes that the structural decarbonisation observed since
2005 continues into the future. Historical data already show a clear downward trend in
their per-capita emissions, and this trajectory is extended in the projection by enforcing a
monotone decline after 2022. This should be interpreted as a conservative continuation of
39
==PAGE:41==
current mitigation efforts, rather than a detailed net-zero pathway.
For non-signatory countries, the underlying assumption is different. Their historical
emissions have increased steadily over the sample period, driven largely by industrialisa-
tion, economic growth, and expanding access to energy. Many of these countries are still
in earlier stages of development, and their per-capita emissions remain well below those of
the signatories. The model therefore assumes that non-signatories continue to raise their
per-capita emissions along the linear trend observed from 2005-2022 as part of an ongoing
effort to close this living-standard gap. This trend is only capped if the projected series
reaches the 2022 per-capita level of the signatory group interpreted as a hypothetical con-
vergence threshold. In practice, convergence is not reached within the projection window,
and the non-signatory path remains monotonically increasing throughout the century. These
assumptions reflect the idea that, under a continuation of present behaviour, economic de-
velopment takes priority over rapid decarbonisation for non-signatories, while signatories
continue their gradual emissions reductions.
Projected Total Emissions
Using the projected per-capita values and the recorded emission totals, long-run total emis-
sions are constructed for each group. For signatories, historical total emissions from 2005–2022
are taken directly from the dataset. A second-order polynomial is then fitted to these totals:
ˆEsig
t
= asig + bsigt + csigt2.
(4.6)
As with the per-capita trend, the projection is constrained to be non-increasing:
Esig
t
= min

ˆEsig
t , Esig
t−1

,
t ≥2023.
(4.7)
For non-signatories, long-run total emissions are derived from the projected per-capita
emissions applied to the observed emissions structure. Because the growth trend is embed-
ded in the per-capita series, the resulting total emissions follow a smooth, steadily increas-
ing path through 2100. The combined global pathway continues to rise, reaching approx-
imately 75 Gt CO2e by 2100. The reductions achieved by signatories are outweighed by
increases among non-signatories, leading to a steadily increasing global total.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.11: Projected CO2e emissions for signatories, non-signatories, and the global total
(2005–2100).
Temperature Implications via TCRE
To translate the global emissions pathway into temperature change, cumulative emissions
are first computed as
Ct =
t
X
τ=2005
Eworld
τ
,
(4.8)
where Eworld
t
is the global total emissions in year t.
Using the standard Transient Climate Response to Cumulative Emissions (TCRE) rela-
tionship, the temperature rise is approximated by
∆Tt = 0.45 ×
Ct
1000,
(4.9)
where 0.45 °C per 1000 Gt CO2e is the central estimate from the IPCC AR6.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.12: Projected global temperature rise relative to 2005, based on cumulative emis-
sions and a TCRE of 0.45 °C per 1000 Gt CO2e. Horizontal lines mark the 1.5 °C and 2 °C
thresholds.
The resulting temperature curve shows that the 1.5 °C threshold is crossed around the
early 2070s, consistent with the cumulative emissions implied by the global pathway. The
warming continues to rise thereafter, reaching approximately 2.41 °C by 2100. Under the
continuation of current trends, neither the 1.5 °C nor 2 °C limits of the Paris Agreement are
met, with cumulative emissions driving a persistent upward trajectory in global tempera-
ture.
42
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Interpreting global emission pathways
The empirical results in Chapter 4 show a clear and persistent divergence between global
emission pathways and those that would be compatible with the temperature limits of the
Paris Agreement. Total CO2 and CH4 emissions continue to rise rather than fall, and the
gap between observed trends and Paris-consistent reduction paths widens throughout the
2005-2022 period. With the observed trends the temperature rise by 2100 is projected to be
2.41 ◦C, which is well above the paris agreement goal. This pattern is consistent with recent
international assessments. The IPCC Sixth Assessment Synthesis Report concludes that
global greenhouse gas emissions must decline rapidly in this decade to keep 1.5 ◦C within
reach and that current policies are insufficient to achieve either the 1.5 ◦C or 2 ◦C goals.(53)
The UNEP Emissions Gap Reports deliver a similar message, finding that present pledges
and implemented policies put the world on a trajectory of around 2.3–2.9 ◦C of warming by
2100.(54; 55)
The modelling in this thesis reproduces these concerns in a simplified form. The global
emission pathway that results from the polynomial projections and group level assumptions
remains increasing throughout the century, even when signatory countries are assumed to
stabilise at low emission levels. In this sense, the quantitative results are not an outlier
but rather a specific illustration of the broader conclusion that current national contribu-
tions do not yet amount to a global mitigation effort compatible with the Paris temperature
objectives.
A second key finding is the structural divergence between Kyoto signatories and non
signatories. At the group level, signatories achieve modest reductions and then stabili-
sation of emissions, while non signatories display continued growth. This outcome re-
flects a combination of factors identified in the wider literature, including differences in in-
dustrialisation timing, energy system structure, technological capabilities and institutional
strength.(56; 53) Early industrialisers in Europe and parts of the OECD have already passed
43
==PAGE:45==
their peak emissions and have begun to decouple economic growth from fossil fuel use,
whereas many large emerging economies are still in an emissions intensive phase of de-
velopment. The results in Chapter 4 therefore align with the view that global mitigation is
increasingly shaped by the trajectory of a relatively small number of large emerging emit-
ters rather than by traditional industrialised economies alone.
A third point that emerges from the analysis concerns the central role of cumulative
emissions. The temperature model applied in Chapter 4 builds on the concept of the Tran-
sient Climate Response to Cumulative Emissions, which shows that global mean tempera-
ture increase is approximately proportional to cumulative CO2 emissions over time.(56; 53)
This implies that even if annual emissions were to stabilise at present levels, warming would
continue as long as net positive emissions add to the atmospheric stock. The projections
in this thesis make this mechanism visible: the rising global pathway leads to steadily in-
creasing cumulative emissions and therefore to a temperature trajectory that reaches 2.41 ◦C
moving beyond both the 1.5 ◦C and 2 ◦C thresholds.
All together, these elements suggest that the main challenge is not only the speed of
emission reductions among early decarbonisers but the persistence of growth among coun-
tries that have not yet peaked. The divergence between signatories and non signatories
in the empirical results mirrors the divergence highlighted in global assessments between
current policy scenarios and pathways that would limit warming to 1.5 ◦C or 2 ◦C. The
following sections examine the drivers behind these patterns in more detail, focusing first
on the countries that appear broadly on track for deep reductions and then on the major
emitters whose continued growth in emissions dominates the global picture.
5.2
Why some signatories are on target
The results in Chapter 4 show that a distinct group of high-income European countries is on
track to meet or exceed the Paris benchmark of a 43% reduction in combined CO2 and CH4
emissions by 2030. Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden and the United Kingdom all display a pattern of sustained reductions from 2005 to
2022, followed by projected declines that extend into the later 2020s.
A first and widely documented explanation is the existence of a long-standing and co-
herent institutional framework for climate policy within the European Union. The EU Emis-
sions Trading System, launched in 2005, remains the world’s largest carbon market and has
played a central role in driving down emissions from the electricity and heavy industrial
sectors.(57; 58) The progressive tightening of the emissions cap and the post-2018 Market
Stability Reserve led to higher and more stable carbon prices, which in turn accelerated
the phase-out of coal-fired generation across many member states.(59) Countries such as
Denmark, Greece, the United Kingdom and Portugal exhibit pronounced declines in power-
sector emissions that align with the period of higher carbon prices and strengthened ETS
44
==PAGE:46==
design.
A second factor is the suite of complementary EU-wide policies aimed at supporting
renewable energy deployment and improving energy efficiency. The Renewable Energy Di-
rective and its successive updates established binding national targets for renewable shares,
contributing to a rapid expansion of wind and solar capacity across countries like Denmark,
Spain, Italy and the United Kingdom.(60) The Energy Efficiency Directive required im-
provements in buildings, appliances and industrial processes, further supporting downward
pressure on total emissions.(61) These policies created a coordinated regional environment
where national measures reinforced one another, reducing the heterogeneity in outcomes
that often characterises climate policy among non-European countries.
National-level initiatives strengthened these trends. Denmark introduced early and sus-
tained support for wind energy, which now accounts for a substantial share of electricity
generation.(62) Greece and Portugal accelerated coal phase-outs well ahead of the Euro-
pean average, driven partly by declining costs of renewables and, in Greece’s case, concerns
over the financial sustainability of domestic lignite.(63) Sweden’s long-standing carbon tax,
first introduced in 1991, remains one of the highest in the world and has contributed sig-
nificantly to sustained reductions in energy-related emissions.(64) The United Kingdom
achieved deep reductions through a combination of the Carbon Price Floor, large-scale re-
newable deployment and the near-complete removal of coal from the power sector.(65)
These structural and policy elements translate into the emission trajectories observed
in Chapter 4. Countries in this group generally experienced a steep decline in coal use,
strong growth in renewable generation and improvements in energy efficiency over the past
two decades. Several also went through broader economic restructuring, with a gradual
shift away from heavy industry towards services and high-value manufacturing. Together,
these developments created conditions where emissions could fall while GDP continued
to grow, a pattern consistent with relative decoupling documented in the climate policy
literature.(66)
The countries that appear on track for the Paris 2030 benchmark share a combination of
early action, stable institutions and comprehensive policy frameworks. Their progress re-
flects not only national choices but also the broader momentum created by EU-wide gover-
nance mechanisms. While these trajectories are not guaranteed to continue indefinitely, they
demonstrate that sustained emission reductions on the scale required by the Paris Agree-
ment are achievable under the right structural and policy conditions.
5.3
Why major signatories remain off target
While a small cluster of European signatories is on track to meet the Paris 2030 benchmark,
the results from Chapter 4 show that most other signatories remain well below the required
pace of reductions. The reasons for this vary across countries, but several common struc-
45
==PAGE:47==
tural and political factors emerge from the data and from established research on national
climate policy.
A first group consists of large industrialised economies whose emission reductions have
been gradual but insufficient. France and Germany fall into this category. Both countries
have implemented significant climate policies, yet their reductions since 2005 about 27%
for France and 23% for Germany remain far short of the required 43% threshold by 2030.
Much of this shortfall reflects the slow pace of decarbonising transport and industry, sectors
that continue to rely heavily on fossil fuels.(67) Germany’s energy transition has delivered
rapid growth in renewables, but the persistence of coal and energy-intensive manufactur-
ing limits further reductions.(68) France’s progress has also slowed as its historically low-
carbon electricity mix leaves fewer “easy” mitigation options, making additional reductions
more costly and complex.(69)
A second group consists of high-income signatories whose economies are shaped by
fossil fuel extraction or export-oriented resource sectors. Canada, Australia, New Zealand
and Norway exemplify this pattern. Despite policy commitments, their emissions declined
only marginally between 2005 and 2022, and in some cases increased. The literature con-
sistently highlights that countries with significant hydrocarbon or agricultural export sec-
tors tend to face stronger political resistance to rapid decarbonisation and slower structural
change.(70) Canada and Australia, for instance, continue to expand oil sands production
and coal or gas exports, while New Zealand and Norway face challenges in reducing emis-
sions from agriculture and offshore oil and gas respectively.(71; 72)
The United States represents a special case where political instability has weakened
long-term decarbonisation efforts. The country withdrew from the Paris Agreement twice,
first in 2017, with the withdrawal becoming effective in 2020, and again following the
2025 administration change—interrupting what was already a fragmented national policy
landscape.(73; 74; 75) Although the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 introduced the most
substantial federal climate measures to date, these policies have not yet translated into re-
ductions on the scale required by 2030.(76) As seen in Chapter 4, the United States is
projected to reduce emissions by only around 34%, falling short of the 43% benchmark.
Japan also remains off track, despite long-standing commitments to energy efficiency.
The country’s emissions fell only modestly after 2005, in part because the post-Fukushima
shutdown of nuclear reactors led to increased reliance on coal and natural gas.(77) This re-
versal is widely noted as a major reason for Japan’s difficulty in sustaining deeper emission
cuts. Although renewable energy deployment has expanded in recent years, it has not yet
offset fossil fuel dependence.
A third group consists of Eastern European countries whose emissions trajectories re-
flect structural and political constraints. Poland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania show min-
imal or even positive growth relative to 2005. Coal continues to play a central role in
Poland’s electricity system, and economic restructuring in parts of Eastern Europe has been
46
==PAGE:48==
uneven.(78) Russia and Ukraine also appear in this cluster, although for different reasons:
Russia’s emissions increased between 2005 and 2022 and are projected to rise further, re-
flecting a fossil-fuel-based economic structure, while Ukraine’s reductions are primarily the
result of economic decline and war-related disruption rather than deliberate mitigation.(79)
Finally, several countries with stable or declining emissions still remain below the re-
quired pace simply because the rate of reduction is too slow. Austria, the Netherlands and
Switzerland fall into this group. Their emissions do decline, but not at the speed needed
to deliver a 43% reduction by 2030. These cases highlight an important distinction made
in the climate policy literature: stabilisation is not equivalent to Paris alignment, since the
Paris benchmark requires steep reductions within a short time frame.(53)
The off-target signatories share a set of underlying characteristics: slower energy tran-
sitions, continued reliance on fossil fuel sectors, political fragmentation or instability, and
insufficient progress in hard-to-abate sectors such as transport, heavy industry and agri-
culture. These factors help explain the heterogeneity observed in Chapter 4 and clarify
why only a small subset of signatories currently appears capable of meeting the Paris 2030
benchmark under existing trends.
5.4
Why non-signatories continue to increase emissions
The findings in Chapter 4 show a clear and persistent rise in emissions among Kyoto non-
signatories, and this upward trajectory continues in all long-term projections. Understand-
ing the structural and policy drivers behind this pattern is essential for interpreting why
global emissions increase even when many signatories have begun to stabilise or reduce
their output.
A defining feature of the non-signatory group is that many of the world’s largest and
fastest-growing economies fall into this category. China and India together account for
a substantial share of global emissions, and both continue to experience rapid economic
expansion characterised by energy-intensive industrial production, urbanisation and rising
household consumption.(80; 81) The scale and pace of their development mean that emis-
sions have continued to grow even as both countries expand renewable energy. Coal re-
mains central in China’s power sector, supplying more than half of its electricity, and India
continues to rely heavily on coal to meet rising demand in manufacturing and residential
consumption.(82)
Indonesia and Brazil demonstrate similar upward trends, though driven by different
structural factors. Indonesia’s emissions are closely linked to industrial expansion and
electricity demand growth, combined with ongoing reliance on coal as a primary power
source.(83) Brazil’s trajectory reflects a mix of fossil-fuel demand and land-use change,
with deforestation in the Amazon continuing to contribute significantly to national emis-
sions despite recent policy efforts.(53)
47
==PAGE:49==
In the Middle East, Iran and Saudi Arabia exhibit persistent increases in emissions
due to their hydrocarbon-based economic structures. Both economies depend heavily on
oil and gas extraction, refining and export, sectors that remain among the most carbon-
intensive globally.(84) Domestic energy consumption is also shaped by long-standing fossil
fuel subsidies, which keep prices low and weaken incentives for efficiency improvements
or fuel switching.(85)
A common factor across these non-signatories is that their development trajectories re-
main tightly coupled with emissions growth. Unlike many industrialised signatories, these
countries are still in phases of expanding infrastructure, building heavy industry, increas-
ing mobility and scaling urban development. These processes are energy intensive and, in
the absence of strong policy frameworks or rapid technological transitions, result in ris-
ing emissions. The policy literature consistently finds that countries with rapidly growing
populations and expanding industrial sectors tend to experience emissions increases unless
major structural changes occur.(86)
The projections developed in this thesis align with these broader assessments. As shown
in Chapter 4, the per-capita emissions of non-signatories continue to rise when extrapolated
linearly, and the aggregated totals increase steadily through the century. Because these
countries account for a large and growing share of global output and population, their rising
emissions dominate the global aggregate, outweighing stabilisation or reductions among
signatories.
The continued upward momentum among non-signatories therefore reflects a combina-
tion of economic scale, structural dependence on fossil fuels, rapid industrialisation and,
in some cases, constrained policy capacity. Without significant changes in energy sys-
tems or international support for transitions in emerging economies, these structural condi-
tions make it likely that non-signatories will remain the primary drivers of global emissions
growth in the decades ahead.
5.5
Implications for global temperature outcomes
The long-term projections developed in Chapter 4 show that, under the continuation of
current trends, global emissions are unlikely to decline in a way that aligns with Paris-
consistent temperature limits. The key driver is the widening gap between stabilising emis-
sions in signatory countries and steadily increasing emissions in non-signatories. Since
warming depends on the cumulative stock of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, any sus-
tained rise in total annual emissions leads directly to higher long-term temperature out-
comes.
The temperature model used in this thesis links cumulative CO2-equivalent emissions
to warming through the Transient Climate Response to Cumulative Emissions (TCRE).
This relationship, supported by large ensembles of Earth system models and summarised in
48
==PAGE:50==
IPCC assessment reports, indicates that each 1000 Gt of cumulative CO2e corresponds to
roughly 0.45 degrees Celsius of warming. The simplicity of the TCRE framework makes it
an appropriate tool for evaluating the implications of aggregate emissions pathways, espe-
cially when examining long-term temperature outcomes rather than short-term variability.
When the projected global emissions from 2005 to 2100 are accumulated, the results
point clearly toward temperature increases that exceed internationally agreed limits. The
models suggest that the world would approach or surpass the 1.5 ◦C threshold by 2070 and
move steadily toward 2.41 ◦C by the end of the century. These outcomes emerge not from
any single country’s trajectory but from the aggregate effect of rising emissions among the
non-signatory group, which more than offsets the reductions achieved elsewhere.
The projections are not predictions in a strict sense, since future emissions will de-
pend on technology, policy, economic conditions and social choices. Nevertheless, the
estimated pathways highlight the scale of adjustment required to bring global emissions
onto a Paris-aligned trajectory. Stabilising emissions in signatory countries is insufficient if
global totals continue to rise, and even ambitious national targets could be overwhelmed by
continued growth in regions where mitigation capacities remain limited. The temperature
results therefore underscore the urgency of coordinated global mitigation efforts rather than
isolated national progress.
5.6
Moral responsibility and per-capita emission dispari-
ties
The results presented in earlier chapters show that global emissions are not driven solely
by aggregate national totals. Large differences in per-capita emissions play a central role in
shaping the distribution of responsibility for current warming. The contrast between high-
income signatory countries and rapidly developing non-signatories is particularly visible in
the 2022 cross-section, where several industrialised economies appear far above the global
average in terms of emissions per person.
These disparities have long been central to debates on climate justice. The principle of
“common but differentiated responsibilities”, embedded in both the UNFCCC and the Ky-
oto Protocol, acknowledges that countries with higher historical and per-capita emissions
bear a greater responsibility to mitigate climate change. The rationale is twofold. First, cu-
mulative emissions from industrialised economies have contributed the largest share of the
atmospheric CO2 stock that drives present warming. Second, higher per-capita emissions
indicate lifestyles, consumption patterns and economic structures that are more carbon in-
tensive than those found in many low- and middle-income countries.
The per-capita analysis in Chapter 4 reinforces this asymmetry. Although several Eu-
ropean signatories have reduced emissions substantially since 2005, their present-day per-
49
==PAGE:51==
capita levels remain significantly higher than those of most non-signatory countries. The
United States, Canada, Australia and several Gulf states sit at the very top of the global
distribution. By contrast, countries such as India, Indonesia and Brazil remain far below
the signatory average on a per-person basis, even though their aggregate emissions are large
in absolute terms.
These differences complicate expectations around global mitigation. Emerging economies
argue that raising living standards for large populations will inevitably involve higher per-
capita emissions in the short term, particularly in the absence of affordable clean-energy
alternatives. High-income countries, by contrast, possess both the historical responsibil-
ity and the technological capacity to reduce emissions more rapidly. This tension lies at
the core of international negotiations and is reflected in discussions surrounding climate
finance, technology transfer and adaptation support (87).
The moral dimension becomes even sharper when considering the uneven distribution of
climate impacts. Regions with low per-capita emissions, including many African and South
Asian countries, face some of the most severe consequences of climate change despite
contributing minimally to global warming (88). This inequity forms the basis for increasing
calls for stronger commitments from high-income economies. The logic is straightforward.
If the countries with the highest per-capita emissions do not move rapidly toward deep and
sustained reductions, the remaining global carbon budget will be exhausted before lower-
emitting countries achieve even moderate levels of economic development.
A further implication of the per-capita gap is the question of global leadership. Ambi-
tious targets set by a small group of signatories are unlikely to be sufficient as long as large
emitters with high per-capita levels continue to fall short of their 2030 pathways. At the
same time, rapidly developing economies argue that fairness requires space for economic
growth. Reconciling these positions remains one of the central obstacles to a cooperative
global mitigation strategy.
The analysis in this thesis underscores that equitable climate action cannot be separated
from the per-capita dimension. Without a significant acceleration of decarbonisation in
high-emitting signatory countries, combined with sustained international support to enable
low-carbon development elsewhere, neither the 1.5◦C nor the 2◦C targets can be achieved.
The moral responsibility implied by current per-capita distributions therefore adds weight
to the scientific urgency documented in the previous section.
5.7
Consequences of exceeding 1.5◦C and 2◦C
The projected temperature pathways presented in Chapter 4 indicate that continued global
emissions growth would place the world on course to surpass the 1.5◦C warming limit little
after mid-century, with temperatures approaching 2.41◦C by 2100. These thresholds are
not arbitrary. They correspond to levels of warming at which the physical, ecological and
50
==PAGE:52==
socio-economic risks increase sharply, as documented in successive IPCC assessments.
The IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5◦C highlights that even a small
increment of warming beyond this level has disproportionate impacts on climate extremes,
hydrological stress and ecosystem resilience (89). At 1.5◦C, the frequency and intensity of
heatwaves rise substantially, but at 2◦C they become far more severe and prolonged. The
difference is particularly evident in densely populated regions of South Asia, sub-Saharan
Africa and the Middle East, where dangerous heat conditions are projected to become more
frequent. These changes carry direct consequences for human health, labour productivity
and mortality rates.
Marine and terrestrial ecosystems are similarly sensitive to small increases in average
temperature. Coral reef systems, for example, are projected to decline by 70–90 per cent
at 1.5◦C of warming, while at 2◦C the IPCC projects losses in excess of 99 per cent, effec-
tively eliminating most warm-water coral ecosystems (89). The additional warming also
accelerates biodiversity loss across forests, wetlands and polar regions, with many species
losing large fractions of their climatic range.
Higher levels of warming also amplify risks related to water scarcity and food security.
The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report finds that drought frequency increases across many
mid-latitude and subtropical regions with each increment of warming, affecting both rain-
fed and irrigated agriculture (88). Crop yields for staple grains such as maize, wheat and
rice are projected to decline more steeply beyond 1.5◦C, especially in low-latitude countries
where food systems are already vulnerable.
Sea-level rise is another domain where the difference between 1.5◦C and 2◦C becomes
substantial. Even in a 1.5◦C scenario, global mean sea level is expected to rise significantly
due to thermal expansion and ice-sheet melt. At 2◦C, however, the likelihood of triggering
long-term, potentially irreversible ice-sheet loss increases, leading to multi-metre sea-level
rise over subsequent centuries (90). Although this long-term response unfolds over a slower
timescale, its implications for coastal infrastructure, low-lying nations and global migration
patterns are profound.
Climate-related economic losses are projected to rise sharply as warming exceeds these
thresholds. The World Meteorological Organization reports that weather-related disasters
have already increased fivefold over the past fifty years, and the magnitude of losses grows
disproportionately with warming (91). Exceeding 2◦C would further increase financial risks
related to extreme weather, agricultural disruption, property loss and infrastructure damage.
The distribution of climate impacts is also uneven. Countries responsible for the small-
est share of cumulative emissions tend to be the most vulnerable to climate hazards. Low-
income nations face heightened exposure to flooding, food insecurity and health risks, with
fewer resources to adapt. As a result, the failure to limit warming below 2◦C would exac-
erbate existing inequalities and intensify global climate justice concerns. The moral impli-
cations of this imbalance reinforce the urgency of collective mitigation efforts, particularly
51
==PAGE:53==
given the disparities in historical emissions and current per-capita contributions.
Overall, the temperature outcomes associated with the projected emissions pathways
imply severe and escalating risks. Avoiding these consequences requires rapid global mit-
igation well beyond the reductions currently achieved, especially among countries where
emissions continue to rise. The findings from this thesis therefore underline the critical im-
portance of accelerating international climate action in order to prevent the most damaging
outcomes of climate change.
52
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
6.1
Summary of findings
This thesis examined global progress toward the Paris Agreement by combining historical
emissions data with forward-looking projections for CO2 and CH4. The analysis addressed
four research questions focused on the distribution of global emissions, the progress of
Paris signatories, the behaviour of non-signatories, and the likely temperature outcomes if
recent trends persist.
The first set of findings showed that global greenhouse gas emissions remain heav-
ily concentrated among a small number of countries. China, the United States and India
stand at the top of the distribution, with the remaining largest emitters consisting of Rus-
sia, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Germany. While several advanced
economies have stabilised or reduced their emissions since 2005, the growth observed in
major emerging economies has kept the global total on an upward path.
The evaluation of Paris Agreement signatories documented a mixed picture. A small
group of European countries are projected to achieve or exceed a 43 per cent reduction in
emissions by 2030 relative to 2005. Most other signatories, including the United States,
Japan, Canada and Australia, remain off track under current trends. The distinction reflects
long-standing sectoral patterns, energy mixes and national policy choices.
The comparison between Kyoto ratifiers and non-ratifiers revealed broader structural
differences. Non-signatory countries show persistent increases in both per-capita emissions
and emissions intensity, while most signatories display flatter or declining trends. Bubble
charts and trajectory plots highlighted that several non-signatories occupy high-emitting
positions on both dimensions despite lower per-capita values relative to high-income sig-
natories. This divergence explains why reductions achieved by early participants in global
climate agreements have not translated into a global decline.
The final set of results considered long-term projections.
Non-signatory emissions
continue to rise under a linear trend, while signatories show stabilisation after their de-
53
==PAGE:55==
clining trajectories are capped to avoid unrealistic increases. The combined path leads
to steady growth in global CO2e emissions throughout the century. Applying the TCRE
framework suggests that global temperatures would exceed the 1.5 °C threshold well be-
fore mid-century and approach or surpass 2 °C by 2100, with associated risks described
earlier in the discussion chapter.
6.2
Implications
The findings point to an emissions landscape shaped by structural differences that have
persisted across decades. Countries with early climate commitments have made progress
but now account for a shrinking share of global emissions. At the same time, growing
economies whose emissions continue to rise play an increasingly central role in determining
whether global climate targets can be met. The results underscore the challenge of aligning
development pathways with mitigation goals at a global scale.
A second implication relates to fairness. High-income countries continue to exhibit
elevated per-capita emissions even after substantial reductions. Many low- and middle-
income countries, despite their rapid aggregate growth, remain far below these levels on a
per-person basis. These disparities reinforce longstanding debates on climate justice and
responsibility, particularly in light of the uneven distribution of climate impacts.
The temperature projections place these dynamics into sharper relief. Without faster
and deeper reductions from the largest emitters, particularly those with rising per-capita
emissions, the probability of staying below 2 °C diminishes rapidly. The results therefore
support the growing consensus that global mitigation efforts require both accelerated do-
mestic transitions and stronger forms of international cooperation.
6.3
Limitations
Several limitations should be acknowledged. The analysis uses territorial emissions, which
measure emissions produced within a country’s borders, rather than consumption-based
estimates. This distinction matters for countries that outsource carbon-intensive production.
The modelling approach relies on polynomial fits and linear trends, which are useful for
examining broad trajectories but cannot account for sudden policy changes, technological
breakthroughs or structural economic shocks.
Data constraints also apply. Some countries were excluded due to incomplete emissions
or GDP series, and methane-to-CO2e conversions follow the standard factors available in
the Our World in Data dataset. The analysis focuses on aggregate national emissions and
does not examine sector-specific patterns or the relative contributions of industry, transport,
energy or land use. Finally, the temperature model uses a simplified TCRE approximation
54
==PAGE:56==
rather than a full climate system model, which provides a useful benchmark but cannot
capture complex Earth-system feedbacks.
6.4
Future research
Future work could extend the analysis in several directions. Incorporating consumption-
based emissions would provide a fuller picture of responsibility, especially for high-income
economies. More advanced forecasting methods, such as structural decomposition analysis
or machine-learning-based emissions models, could improve the reliability of projections.
Sectoral modelling would allow for a more detailed understanding of how different parts of
each economy contribute to long-term trends.
Another valuable direction would be the integration of climate finance flows and tech-
nology transfer commitments. These factors are often discussed in policy contexts but are
rarely incorporated into quantitative emission projections. Finally, linking cumulative emis-
sions trajectories with socio-economic outcomes, particularly in vulnerable regions, would
provide a deeper understanding of the human consequences associated with the different
warming pathways highlighted in this thesis.
55
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate change 2021: The
physical science basis,” 2021.
[2] R. Falkner, “The paris agreement and the new logic of international climate politics,”
International Affairs, vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 1107–1125, 2016.
[3] U. N. F. C. on Climate Change (UNFCCC), “The paris agreement,” 2021. Accessed
2025-10-14.
[4] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Global warming of 1.5°c. an
ipcc special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°c above pre-industrial
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways,” IPCC, 2018.
[5] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate change 2022: Mitiga-
tion of climate change,” 2022.
[6] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “United nations frame-
work convention on climate change,” 1992.
[7] J. Gütschow et al., “The PRIMAP-hist national historical emissions time series (1850–
2014),” Earth System Science Data, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 571–603, 2016.
[8] M. Friman and G. Strandberg, “Historical responsibility for climate change: Science
and the science–policy interface,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 243–259, 2012.
[9] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Kyoto protocol to the
united nations framework convention on climate change,” 1997.
[10] D. G. Victor, The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Slow Global
Warming. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
[11] C. Böhringer, “The kyoto protocol: A review and perspectives,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 451–466, 2003.
56
==PAGE:58==
[12] L. Schneider, “Is the CDM fulfilling its environmental and sustainable development
objectives? an evaluation of the CDM and options for improvement,” tech. rep., Öko-
Institut, Berlin, 2007. Report prepared for WWF.
[13] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate change 2014: Mitiga-
tion of climate change,” 2014.
[14] J. Rogelj et al., “Paris agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep warming well
below 2°c,” Nature, vol. 534, pp. 631–639, 2016.
[15] United Nations Environment Programme, “Emissions gap report 2022: The closing
window – climate crisis calls for rapid transformation of societies,” 2022.
[16] United Nations Environment Programme, “Emissions gap report 2023,” 2023.
[17] International Energy Agency, “Co2 emissions in 2022,” 2023.
[18] International Energy Agency, “Net zero by 2050: A roadmap for the global energy
sector,” 2021.
[19] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Global stocktake under
the paris agreement,” 2023.
[20] Climate Action Tracker, “Climate action tracker – tracking climate action and mea-
suring it against the paris agreement,” 2025.
[21] World Resources Institute, NewClimate Institute, and Climate Action Tracker, “State
of climate action 2023,” 2023.
[22] P. Friedlingstein et al., “Global carbon budget 2022,” Earth System Science Data,
vol. 14, pp. 4811–4900, 2022.
[23] M. R. Raupach et al., “Global and regional drivers of accelerating co2 emissions,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 104, no. 24, pp. 10288–10293,
2007.
[24] C. L. Quéré et al., “Global carbon budget 2016,” Earth System Science Data, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 605–649, 2016.
[25] C. L. Quéré et al., “Drivers of declining co2 emissions in 18 developed economies,”
Nature Climate Change, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 213–217, 2019.
[26] M. Saunois et al., “The global methane budget 2000–2017,” Earth System Science
Data, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1561–1623, 2020.
57
==PAGE:59==
[27] E. G. Nisbet et al., “Very strong atmospheric methane growth in the four years 2014–
2017: Implications for the paris agreement,” Global Biogeochemical Cycles, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 318–342, 2019.
[28] D. Shindell et al., “Simultaneously mitigating near-term climate change and improv-
ing human health and food security,” Science, vol. 335, no. 6065, pp. 183–189, 2012.
[29] United Nations Environment Programme and Climate and Clean Air Coalition,
“Global methane assessment: Benefits and costs of mitigating methane emissions,”
2021.
[30] R. A. Alvarez et al., “Assessment of methane emissions from the u.s. oil and gas
supply chain,” Science, vol. 361, no. 6398, pp. 186–188, 2018.
[31] Y. Kaya, “Impact of carbon dioxide emission control on GNP growth: Interpretation
of proposed scenarios,” tech. rep., IPCC Energy and Industry Subgroup, Response
Strategies Working Group, Paris, 1990. Working paper.
[32] H. Haberl et al., “A systematic review of the evidence on decoupling of gdp, resource
use and greenhouse gas emissions,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 15, no. 6,
p. 065003, 2020.
[33] L. Chancel, “Global carbon inequality over 1990–2019,” Nature Sustainability, vol. 5,
no. 11, pp. 931–938, 2022.
[34] L. Chancel and T. Piketty, “Carbon and inequality: From kyoto to paris – trends in
the global inequality of carbon emissions (1998–2013) & prospects for an equitable
adaptation fund,” tech. rep., World Inequality Lab, 2015.
[35] D. Ivanova et al., “The unequal distribution of household carbon footprints in europe
and its link to sustainability,” Global Sustainability, vol. 3, p. e18, 2020.
[36] M. Grosso et al., “Carbon and environmental footprint inequality of household con-
sumption in the eu,” Joint Research Centre Technical Report, 2023.
[37] H. Ritchie, P. Rosado, and M. Roser, “Co2 and greenhouse gas emissions,” 2023.
[38] H. Ritchie and M. Roser, “Co2 emissions,” 2023.
[39] Our World in Data and World Bank Data, “Co2 and greenhouse gas emissions dataset,”
2024.
[40] N. Höhne et al., “Progress under the paris agreement and options for closing the gap,”
Nature Climate Change, vol. 10, pp. 1009–1016, 2020.
58
==PAGE:60==
[41] MIT Climate Portal, “How are countries held accountable under the paris agree-
ment?,” 2025.
[42] Y. Dagnet et al., “Assessing the adequacy of the global response to the paris agree-
ment,” One Earth, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1369–1381, 2021.
[43] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate change and land: An
ipcc special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable
land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems,”
2019.
[44] D. I. Stern, “The rise and fall of the environmental kuznets curve,” World Develop-
ment, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1419–1439, 2004.
[45] P. Sadorsky, “The impact of financial development and economic growth on energy
use and co2 emissions in g7 countries,” Energy Economics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 137–
145, 2010.
[46] N. Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2007.
[47] C. L. Quéré et al., “Global carbon budget 2023,” Earth System Science Data, vol. 15,
no. 12, pp. 5301–5369, 2023.
[48] H. Ritchie, M. Roser, et al., “Co2 and greenhouse gas emissions,” 2024.
[49] M. Crippa, D. Guizzardi, et al., “Edgar v7.0 global atmospheric emissions database,”
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, 2023.
[50] O. W. in Data, “Methane emissions,” 2024.
[51] UNFCCC, “Kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate
change,” 1997.
[52] IPCC, “Climate change 2021: The physical science basis,” 2021.
[53] IPCC, “Climate change 2023: Synthesis report. contribution of working groups i,
ii and iii to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change.” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2023. Accessed 15 September
2025.
[54] United Nations Environment Programme, “Emissions gap report 2023: Broken record
– temperatures hit new highs, yet world fails to cut emissions (again).” UNEP, 2023.
Accessed 10 November 2025.
59
==PAGE:61==
[55] United Nations Environment Programme, “Emissions gap report series.” UNEP, 2022.
Accessed 5 November 2025.
[56] IPCC, “Global warming of 1.5°c. an ipcc special report on the impacts of global warm-
ing of 1.5°c above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways.” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2018. Accessed 8 Novem-
ber 2025.
[57] European Commission, “Eu emissions trading system (eu ets),” 2023. Accessed 20
October 2025.
[58] A. D. Ellerman and B. Buchner, “The european union emissions trading scheme: Ori-
gins, allocation, and early results,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 45–62, 2016.
[59] ICAP, “Market stability reserve: Impact and functioning,” 2020. Accessed 24 October
2025.
[60] European Commission, “Renewable energy directive (eu) 2018/2001,” 2018.
Ac-
cessed 24 October 2025.
[61] European Environment Agency, “Energy efficiency directive,” 2018. Accessed 27
October 2025.
[62] International Energy Agency, “Denmark 2022 energy policy review,” 2022. Accessed
27 October 2025.
[63] WWF Greece, “Greece’s transition away from lignite: Assessment and policy recom-
mendations,” 2021. Accessed 27 October 2025.
[64] Swedish Ministry of Finance, “Sweden’s carbon tax,” 2020. Accessed 28 October
2025.
[65] UK Climate Change Committee, “Progress in reducing emissions: 2023 report to
parliament,” 2023. Accessed 10 November 2025.
[66] OECD, “Decarbonising european economies: Sectoral transitions and policy drivers,”
2021. Accessed 10 November 2025.
[67] OECD, “Industrial transitions and climate policy in advanced economies,” 2021. Ac-
cessed 11 November 2025.
[68] International Energy Agency, “Germany energy policy review 2023,” 2023. Accessed
11 November 2025.
60
==PAGE:62==
[69] International Energy Agency, “France energy policy review 2021,” 2021. Accessed
11 November 2025.
[70] OECD, “Fossil fuel supply, trade and economic dependence: Policy challenges,”
2020. Accessed 11 November 2025.
[71] International Energy Agency, “Canada energy policy review 2022,” 2022. Accessed
11 November 2025.
[72] International Energy Agency, “Norway energy policy review 2022,” 2022. Accessed
11 November 2025.
[73] The White House, “Statement by president trump on the paris climate accord.” White
House Press Release, 2017. Accessed 12 November 2025.
[74] U.S. Department of State, “On the u.s. withdrawal from the paris agreement,” 2020.
Accessed 12 November 2025.
[75] The White House, “Executive order 13990: Protecting public health and the environ-
ment and restoring science to tackle the climate crisis,” 2021. Accessed 12 November
2025.
[76] Climate Action Tracker, “United states country assessment,” 2023.
Accessed 13
November 2025.
[77] International Energy Agency, “Japan energy policy review 2021,” 2021. Accessed 11
November 2025.
[78] European Commission, “Just transition mechanism: Supporting the regions most af-
fected by the transition,” 2020. Accessed 12 November 2025.
[79] International Energy Agency, “Russia energy policy review 2021,” 2021. Accessed
12 November 2025.
[80] International Energy Agency, “China energy outlook 2023,” 2023.
Accessed 13
November 2025.
[81] International Energy Agency, “India energy outlook 2023,” 2023.
Accessed 13
November 2025.
[82] World Resources Institute, “Global coal plant tracker and policy analysis,” 2022. Ac-
cessed 13 November 2025.
[83] International Energy Agency, “Indonesia energy transition outlook 2022,” 2022. Ac-
cessed 14 November 2025.
61
==PAGE:63==
[84] OPEC, “World oil outlook 2023,” 2023. Accessed 14 November 2025.
[85] International Monetary Fund, “Global fossil fuel subsidies: Country-level data,” 2023.
Accessed 14 November 2025.
[86] UN Environment Programme, “Emissions gap report 2023,” 2023.
Accessed 14
November 2025.
[87] W. P. Pauw, R. J. T. Klein, N. K. Gupta, and S. T. Fei, “Beyond headline mitigation
numbers: Drivers of climate finance pledges,” Climate Policy, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 743–
759, 2020.
[88] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “Climate change 2022: Impacts, adap-
tation and vulnerability,” 2022.
[89] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “Ipcc special report on global warming
of 1.5°c,” 2018.
[90] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “Climate change 2021: The physical
science basis,” 2021.
[91] World Meteorological Organization, “Atlas of mortality and economic losses from
weather, climate and water-related hazards (1970-2021)),” 2021.
62
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
Appendix A: Additional Data Tables
A.1
Country-Level Emission Forecasts
This appendix contains complete total CO2e emission forecasts for all countries included in
the dataset, generated using the modelling approach described in Chapter 3. These plots il-
lustrate the historical emissions from 2005–2022, the fitted model, and the projected values
to 2030. They serve as a supplementary reference to the aggregate and group-level analyses
presented in Chapter 4.
63
==PAGE:65==
10
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Afghanistan
6
8
10
12
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Albania
150
200
250
300
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Algeria
50
60
70
80
90
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Angola
200
250
300
350
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Argentina
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Armenia
==PAGE:66==
400
500
600
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Australia
60
70
80
90
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Austria
30
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Azerbaijan
40
60
80
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Bahrain
100
150
200
250
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Bangladesh
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Barbados
==PAGE:67==
50
60
70
80
90
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Belarus
70
90
110
130
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Belgium
4
8
12
16
20
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Benin
30
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Bolivia
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Bosnia and Herzegovina
5
10
15
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Botswana
==PAGE:68==
700
900
1100
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Brazil
40
50
60
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Bulgaria
10
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Burkina Faso
2
4
6
8
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Burundi
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cambodia
20
25
30
35
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cameroon
==PAGE:69==
500
600
700
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Canada
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cape Verde
8
10
12
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Central African Republic
20
40
60
80
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Chad
50
70
90
110
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Chile
4000
8000
12000
16000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: China
==PAGE:70==
80
120
160
200
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Colombia
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Comoros
12
16
20
24
28
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Congo
8
10
12
14
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Costa Rica
20
30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cote d'Ivoire
20
24
28
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Croatia
==PAGE:71==
25
30
35
40
45
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cuba
5
6
7
8
9
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Cyprus
100
120
140
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Czechia
20
40
60
80
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Democratic Republic of Congo
20
40
60
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Denmark
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Djibouti
==PAGE:72==
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Dominica
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Dominican Republic
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Ecuador
200
300
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Egypt
7
8
9
10
11
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: El Salvador
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Equatorial Guinea
==PAGE:73==
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Estonia
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Eswatini
40
80
120
160
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Ethiopia
25
50
75
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Finland
300
350
400
450
500
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: France
10
15
20
25
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Gabon
==PAGE:74==
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Gambia
5
10
15
20
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Georgia
600
700
800
900
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Germany
10
20
30
40
50
60
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Ghana
50
100
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Greece
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Guatemala
==PAGE:75==
10
20
30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Guinea
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Guinea−Bissau
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Haiti
10
15
20
25
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Honduras
30
35
40
45
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Hong Kong
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Hungary
==PAGE:76==
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Iceland
2000
3000
4000
5000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: India
600
900
1200
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Indonesia
500
750
1000
1250
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Iran
100
200
300
400
500
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Iraq
40
50
60
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Ireland
==PAGE:77==
40
50
60
70
80
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Israel
200
300
400
500
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Italy
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Jamaica
800
1000
1200
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Japan
15
20
25
30
35
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Jordan
200
300
400
500
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Kazakhstan
==PAGE:78==
40
60
80
100
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Kenya
80
100
120
140
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Kuwait
10
20
30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Kyrgyzstan
10
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Laos
6
8
10
12
14
16
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Latvia
15
20
25
30
35
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Lebanon
==PAGE:79==
3
4
5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Lesotho
2
3
4
5
6
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Liberia
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Libya
15
20
25
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Lithuania
8
9
10
11
12
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Luxembourg
15
20
25
30
35
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Madagascar
==PAGE:80==
3
6
9
12
15
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Malawi
200
300
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Malaysia
10
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mali
0
1
2
3
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Malta
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mauritania
3
4
5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mauritius
==PAGE:81==
400
500
600
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mexico
4
8
12
16
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Moldova
25
50
75
100
125
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mongolia
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Montenegro
40
60
80
100
120
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Morocco
10
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Mozambique
==PAGE:82==
60
80
100
120
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Myanmar
5
7
9
11
13
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Namibia
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Nepal
120
140
160
180
200
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Netherlands
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: New Zealand
10
14
18
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Nicaragua
==PAGE:83==
10
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Niger
250
300
350
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Nigeria
60
70
80
90
100
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: North Korea
7
8
9
10
11
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: North Macedonia
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Norway
40
80
120
160
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Oman
==PAGE:84==
200
300
400
500
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Pakistan
10
15
20
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Panama
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Paraguay
50
75
100
125
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Peru
100
150
200
250
300
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Philippines
250
300
350
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Poland
==PAGE:85==
20
40
60
80
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Portugal
100
200
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Qatar
80
100
120
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Romania
1200
1600
2000
2400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Russia
4
6
8
10
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Rwanda
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Saint Lucia
==PAGE:86==
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Sao Tome and Principe
500
750
1000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Saudi Arabia
10
15
20
25
30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Senegal
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Serbia
0.4
0.6
0.8
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Seychelles
4
6
8
10
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Sierra Leone
==PAGE:87==
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Singapore
30
35
40
45
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Slovakia
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Slovenia
300
400
500
600
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: South Africa
400
500
600
700
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: South Korea
200
250
300
350
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Spain
==PAGE:88==
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Sri Lanka
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Sweden
35
40
45
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Switzerland
−30
0
30
60
90
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Syria
200
240
280
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Taiwan
10
20
30
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Tajikistan
==PAGE:89==
50
75
100
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Tanzania
200
250
300
350
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Thailand
4
6
8
10
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Togo
40
50
60
70
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Trinidad and Tobago
20
30
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Tunisia
200
300
400
500
600
700
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Turkey
==PAGE:90==
50
75
100
125
150
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Turkmenistan
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Uganda
200
250
300
350
400
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Ukraine
100
200
300
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: United Arab Emirates
200
300
400
500
600
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: United Kingdom
4000
5000
6000
7000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: United States
==PAGE:91==
20
25
30
35
40
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Uruguay
125
150
175
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Uzbekistan
100
150
200
250
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Venezuela
100
200
300
400
500
600
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Vietnam
20
30
40
50
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Yemen
15
20
25
30
35
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Zambia
==PAGE:92==
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
Year
Total CO2e (CO2 + Methane CO2e) − Million Tons
Total CO2e: Zimbabwe
