==PAGE:1==
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image
Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evalu­
ation and Compliance
Master Thesis
November, 2025
By
Márk Gyöngyösi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this thesis in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution and title.
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324,
DK, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
Version:
Master’s thesis submitted to DTU for the MSc in Human­Centered Artifi­
cial Intelligence
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Technical University of Denmark,
in the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, in collaboration with
Hochschule Darmstadt, Germany, within the da/sec Biometrics and Security Research
Group (https://dasec.h-da.de/). The work was conducted as part of the requirements for
the Master of Science in Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Márk Gyöngyösi ­ s232976
Signature
Date
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
ii
11/29/2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Facial image quality assessment (FIQA) ensures that images used for official face ver­
ification are suitable for accurate and reliable recognition. As identity systems become
digital and face recognition is used in uncontrolled environments (e.g., border control),
manual quality checks are no longer practical. This has led to the development of au­
tomated methods for assessing face­image quality. Existing FIQA algorithms estimate
quality through feature vectors but provide limited interpretability. This thesis investigates
whether vision­capable Large Language Models (LLMs) can complement existing FIQA
workflows. A set of state­of­the­art LLMs were evaluated on a dataset containing face
images with specific defects. Models were tested on four tasks: binary classification of
standard compliance, identification of specific defects, prediction of quality scores compa­
rable to FIQA­generated quality scores, and generation of natural­language explanations
that justify the model’s decision. The results show that larger models benefit from ex­
tended context, whereas smaller models frequently misinterpret instructions or deviate
from the expected result. Across models, subject­related defects (e.g., face obstructions,
expression) are detected more consistently than capture­related defects (e.g., illumina­
tion, resolution, background). Qualitative analysis further reveals that explanations re­
main fluent and confident even when incorrect. Overall, the study demonstrates that while
LLMs can produce coherent and interpretable feedback, their reliability is inconsistent and
strongly dependent on prompt design and model scale. Nonetheless, their ability to pro­
vide accurate assessments, despite not being trained specifically for FIQA, highlights the
remarkable generalization and in­context learning capabilities of LLMs.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Ana Estrada Real, PhD Candidate, da/sec Biometrics & Security Research Group,
Hochschule Darmstadt
I would like to express my gratitude to Ana Estrada Real for her guidance and kindness
throughout this thesis. Our weekly meetings were invaluable, and her constructive feed­
back and encouragement made this work both possible and enjoyable. I am sincerely
grateful for her always being approachable.
Prof. Dr. Christoph Busch, da/sec Biometrics & Security Research Group, Hochschule
Darmstadt
I would also like to thank Prof. Dr. Christoph Busch for his supervision and for providing
the opportunity to work on this project within the da/sec research group. His depth of
expertise, precision, and insightful suggestions strengthened the quality of this thesis. I
am thankful for his mentorship and high standards, which pushed me to improve the work
at every stage.
Family and Friends
Finally, I want to thank my family and friends for their support and encouragement during
this challenging period. Their understanding, patience, and motivation helped me stay
persistent throughout the entire process.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background on Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Explainability in Biometrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
State­of­the­art in FIQA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Objectives and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
8
3
Methodology
10
3.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Model Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Prompt Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Hardware and Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Implementation
13
4.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
LLM Requests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Result Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Experimental Results
16
5.1
Prompt development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.2
Output Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
LLM Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Extended Evaluation with Qwen2.5vl:32B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.5
Natural Language Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.6
Test with Real Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.7
Comparison with OFIQ Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Discussion
30
6.1
Prompt Sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Comparison with Traditional FIQA Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3
Plausible but Incorrect Justifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.4
Implications for ICAO Compliance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.5
Addressing the Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.7
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.8
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Conclusion
33
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
v
==PAGE:7==
Bibliography
34
A Appendix
37
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background on Biometrics
According to Jain et al.[1], biometrics refers to the automated identification of individuals
based on their unique physiological or behavioral characteristics. These characteristics,
also known as biometric traits, include fingerprints, iris patterns, facial traits, voice, etc.
Since these traits are unique to each individual and generally stable over time, biometric
systems are considered as a great alternative to traditional methods of authentication,
such as passwords or ID cards.
One of the earliest known research publications on what is now called biometrics was
a paper published in 1963 on fingerprint recognition [2]. However, the use of biological
characteristics for identification is not a modern invention. Historic records suggest the
use of fingerprints for identification from the Chinese dynasty era (1046­256 BCE) [3]. Ma­
jor discoveries and inventions brought the widespread use of fingerprints for identification
purposes only in the late 19th century [4]. Sir Francis Galton was the first to demonstrate
that fingerprints are both unique to each individual and permanent over time [5]. Thus, fin­
gerprinting began to be used in law enforcement. Improvements in digital computing and
machine learning expanded the accuracy and availability of biometric systems, allowing
them to be used not just by governments and police forces but also in commercial and
personal contexts, e.g., for smartphone usage and transaction control [6].
Nowadays, biometric technologies have become widely used due to their secure and
convenient authentication capabilities. The rise of smartphones, with advanced cameras
and sensors, has accelerated this trend [7], making phones capable personal security
devices. Many smartphones now include fingerprint and facial recognition capabilities.
These biometrics are used in applications such as mobile banking and access control to
protect sensitive data.
Face recognition is an active research field in biometrics, as it is widely used in commer­
cial, personal, and law enforcement applications. The ability to capture facial images at
a distance without physical contact makes this form of biometrics an appealing option for
fast, noninvasive identification at airports or city surveillance systems. Progress has been
made over the years, with 2D FR methods reaching high accuracy in controlled environ­
ments. However, performance often degrades under certain conditions. To address these
challenges, 3D FR approaches have been developed, although they remain sensitive to
changes in facial expression. Recent advances in deep learning have further improved
the accuracy of FR systems to up to 99% on thousands of subjects, outperforming human
recognition capabilities [8].
An important aspect of facial recognition is the assessment of face image quality. High­
quality facial images improve the performance of recognition algorithms, whereas poor­
quality images lead to misidentifications. FIQA techniques have therefore been developed
to evaluate the usability of an image before it is processed by an FR system. FIQA helps in
filtering out low­quality samples, guiding data collection, and improving the overall system
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
2
==PAGE:9==
accuracy. While an open­source fingerprint quality tool (NFIQ) 1 has existed since 2004,
no equivalent for face images has been available. To address this, Germany’s BSI is
developing the OFIQ 2 framework to provide a transparent, standardized assessment of
face image quality nationally and internationally.
1.2
Explainability in Biometrics
An FIQA algorithm that not only performs well but also offers interpretable outputs is
essential for building trustworthy and legally compliant systems. The integration of Ex­
plainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) into biometrics addresses this gap by making model
decisions more understandable. Recent work [9] demonstrates how visual and feature­
based explanations, using techniques such as SHAP, LIME, and Grad­CAM, can illumi­
nate which facial regions influence recognition outcomes. These technologies enhance
user trust and system usability but also support compliance with GDPR.
A recent literature review [10] highlights the growing but still limited adoption of XAI
techniques in biometric systems, with most of the 47 analyzed studies focusing on facial
biometrics. These applications tend to rely on model­centric explanations, often overlook­
ing user perception and human­computer interaction aspects. This reveals a research
gap in the broader application of XAI to other biometric cues and the need for evaluation
strategies that consider end­user interpretability and usability.
As this thesis focuses specifically on facial biometrics, it is important to emphasize that
explainability in this domain not only improves transparency but also helps in detecting
and mitigating demographic biases. Such biases can be those related to age, gender,
or ethnicity and can lead to unfair system performance. This is especially important in
sensitive contexts like border control or law enforcement.
1.3
State­of­the­art in FIQA
FIQA refers to the process of taking a face image as input to produce a quality estimate
as output. Recent advances in FIQA have been closely tied to the progress in deep
learning and face recognition technologies. Early FIQA approaches relied on general
image quality metrics (e.g., blur, illumination). State­of­the­art methods now focus on
recognition­based quality assessment, where the quality of a facial image is estimated
based on its utility for face recognition tasks [11]. In the following, several state­of­the­art
FIQA algorithms will be introduced. These methods differ in their underlying assumptions,
training strategies, and the way they incorporate FR signals.
SER­FIQ [12] (Stochastic Embedding Robustness for Face Image Quality) is an unsuper­
vised method for estimating face image quality without the need for manual or artificial
quality labels. The core idea is to evaluate the variation in embeddings produced by ran­
dom subnetworks of a face recognition model with dropout enabled. High­quality images
yield consistent embeddings across these subnetworks, while low­quality images result in
high variability. This embedding stability serves as a proxy for face image quality. Unlike
prior supervised methods, SER­FIQ is model­specific, avoids the pitfalls of biased labels,
and requires no training.
1https://www.nist.gov/services-resources/software/nfiq-2
2https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/Themen/Unternehmen-und-Organisationen/Informationen-und-
Empfehlungen/Freie-Software/OFIQ/OFIQ_node.html
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
3
==PAGE:10==
FaceQnet [13] is a deep learning­based FIQA method designed to estimate how suit­
able an image is for face recognition. The system fine­tunes a ResNet­50 architecture on
VGGFace2 images using labels. Groundtruth quality labels are derived using FaceNet to
compute comparison scores between ICAO­compliant and non­compliant images. These
labels guide the network to learn a quality measure correlating with face recognition per­
formance. The resulting quality scores from FaceQnet show high correlation with the
verification accuracy of a commercial off­the­shelf face recognition system.
MagFace [14] is an FR and FIQA framework that learns a universal feature representa­
tion, where the magnitude of the embedding indicates the quality of the input image. By
integrating a loss function, MagFace enforces a monotonic relationship between feature
magnitude and recognizability. It also strengthens class structure by pulling easy samples
in and pushing hard ones out, reducing overfitting on poor­quality data. This dual­purpose
embedding improves performance on both recognition and quality tasks and is included
as one of the algorithms in the OFIQ framework.
The CR­FIQA[15] approach introduces the concept of relative classifiability. This measure
is based on how a sample’s feature representation is positioned in angular space relative
to its own class center and the nearest negative class center. This method probes internal
network dynamics during training to learn this property, which inherently correlates with
the sample’s utility for face recognition. According to the authors, this method consistently
outperforms state­of­the­art FIQA algorithms, especially in scenarios involving large age
gaps, pose variations, and varied image quality.
The SDD­FIQA [16] method introduces an unsupervised approach to FIQA by focusing on
the concept of recognizability through the Similarity Distribution Distance (SDD). Unlike
other FIQA methods, SDD­FIQA uses both intra­class and inter­class similarity distribu­
tions to better capture the intrinsic quality of face images. By calculating the Wasserstein
Distance between these similarity distributions, the method generates quality ”pseudo­
labels”, which are then used to train a regression network for quality prediction.
Although all these methods demonstrate strong performance within their respective
studies, a comprehensive and controlled benchmark that compares them under identi­
cal conditions is still lacking. Current evaluations largely rely on the claims and testing
methodologies defined by the original authors.
OFIQ
The Open Source Facial Image Quality 3 framework is a library of open­source algo­
rithms for assessing the quality of facial images. OFIQ serves as the reference imple­
mentation for the international standard ISO/IEC 29794­5 4. Unlike earlier approaches
that relied on proprietary measures, OFIQ offers an assessment pipeline suitable for op­
erational scenarios such as border control systems. At the core of OFIQ is the Unified
Quality Score, which provides an overall estimate of an image’s utility for face recognition.
The OFIQ pipeline begins with face detection and landmark estimation, followed by a se­
ries of preprocessing steps. These steps generate feature representations that feed into
the individual quality assessment algorithms.
This work uses OFIQ due to its standardized and well­documented nature. As an open­
source framework, its algorithms are fully inspectable, and its ISO/IEC 29794­5 compli­
3https://github.com/BSI-OFIQ/OFIQ-Project/blob/main/doc/reports/Public_Report_V1.2_2024_11_
06.pdf
4https://www.iso.org/standard/81005.html
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
4
==PAGE:11==
ance ensures relevance for research.
1.4
Large Language Models
LLMs mark a major advancement in the field of natural language processing (NLP) [17]
and artificial intelligence (AI) [18]. They are designed to understand, generate, and reason
over human language by using large­scale neural networks.
LLMs gained widespread attention following the success of the GPT (Generative Pre­
trained Transformer) series, developed by OpenAI [19]. These breakthroughs introduce
LLMs as a general­purpose tool for a wide range of linguistic and reasoning tasks. Since
then, the field has expanded, with numerous organizations developing open and propri­
etary models such as Google’s Gemini5, and Anthropic’s Claude 6. The rise of LLMs
has had a remarkable technological and economic impact [20]. Their influence is so
widespread that discussions about LLMs and AI now dominate conversations about tech­
nology in both academia and industry.
LLMs are built using deep learning architectures, most notably the Transformer architec­
ture [21]. Transformers rely on a mechanism called self­attention, which allows the model
to weigh the importance of words in a sequence, relative to one another. This enables
the model to capture local and long­range dependencies. They are typically trained on
massive text corpora drawn from books, websites, and scientific papers [22]. It is also
important to mention that there has been significant controversy surrounding how these
datasets are collected. Many large­scale training corpora include copyrighted, private, or
otherwise sensitive material scraped from the internet without explicit consent [23]. An
in­depth discussion of these concerns, however, is beyond the scope of this work.
LLMs are typically trained in two main stages: pre­training and fine­tuning [24]. During pre­
training, the model learns to predict the next word in large volumes of text. This process
enables the model to acquire linguistic knowledge and general reasoning patterns [25]. In
the fine­tuning stage, the pre­trained model is refined on smaller datasets to better align
its responses with task­specific goals [26]. Reinforcement Learning from human feedback
is commonly used during this phase to fine­tune the model [27].
A key determinant of an LLM’s performance is its scale, measured by the number of its
parameters, or internal weights. Larger models, trained on vast datasets, tend to capture
more complex patterns, leading to higher­quality responses [28]. This increase in scale
allows larger models to better generalize to unseen tasks. As model size grows, LLMs
begin to exhibit emergent abilities such as abstraction and multi­step inference capabilities
[29]. Of course, this increase in performance comes with higher computational costs
during training and inference.
In recent years, LLMs have moved from research laboratories into real­world applications.
They now power virtual assistants, customer support systems, and coding assistants,
among others. However, LLMs also raise questions regarding bias and transparency.
These are issues of particular importance in safety­sensitive domains such as biometrics.
Vision­Capable LLMs
Vision­capable LLMs (also called multimodal LLMs) extend traditional language mod­
els by incorporating the ability to process visual inputs. These models typically consist of
5https://gemini.google.com/
6https://claude.ai/
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
5
==PAGE:12==
two main components. A vision encoder turns images into high­dimensional feature rep­
resentations. A language decoder interprets these traits to generate textual outputs [30].
During training, these models learn to match visual traits with textual descriptions. Vision­
capable LLMs began gaining attention, following advances in large­scale multimodal train­
ing. Their performance is influenced not only by the total number of parameters in the
language model but also by the quality and architecture of the visual encoder.
Several state­of­the­art vision­capable LLMs are relevant to this work:
• Gemma37 is a family of multimodal large language models developed by Google
DeepMind. It is designed to process text and/or images.
• Mistral­Small8 is a language model developed by Mistral AI. It is part of the “Small”
line of models, which focus on efficiency with multimodal understanding.
• Qwen2.5­VL9 is a vision–language model developed by Alibaba Cloud. It can pro­
cess images (and in some variants also videos) and then generate text responses,
perform object localization, extract information, or reason about visual inputs.
• The Llama10 Vision models are multimodal large­language models developed by
Meta AI. They extend the previously text­only Llama models by allowing image and
text input.
All these models come in varying parameter configurations and are intended for tasks
involving multimodal reasoning and image understanding. In this work, we explore how
such models can complement traditional FIQA algorithms.
1.5
Problem Statement
Facial biometrics play a more and more important role in identity verification systems.
These systems range from smartphone authentication to airplane onboarding and border
control. As one of the most intuitive biometric modalities, facial recognition systems must
ensure high­quality image capture to function reliably. However, facial image quality is
inherently sensitive to various factors such as illumination, blur, and pose.
Quality assessment algorithms have been developed to quantify the quality of facial
images through the generation of feature vectors. These measurements capture aspects
like those mentioned above. However, these vectors are often not fully exploited by opera­
tors due to a lack of interpretation or practical feedback. Addressing this issue is important
in order to ensure high­quality biometric data collection, enhance system performance,
and contribute to ISO/IEC 29794­5:202511 compliance.
1.6
Objectives and Motivation
Large Language Models can generate text based on input using in­context learning,
where task examples are provided at inference time. Applied to FIQA, LLMs could trans­
late technical quality vectors into user­friendly feedback without retraining. This thesis
proposes to use LLMs and ICL [31] in this way. Furthermore, this thesis explores how
7https://deepmind.google/models/gemma/gemma-3/
8https://mistral.ai/news/mistral-small-3-1
9https://chat.qwen.ai/
10https://www.llama.com/
11https://www.iso.org/standard/81005.html
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
6
==PAGE:13==
LLMs can be used to provide explainable outputs from FIQA algorithms, which supports
compliance with the EU AI Act 12.
The specific research questions guiding this work are:
• RQ1: How can face image quality assessment outputs be optimized to improve
usability and interpretability for non­expert users and system operators?
• RQ2: To what extent can LLMs generate accurate, actionable, and standards­compliant
feedback complementing facial image quality vectors?
12https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/article/86/
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
7
==PAGE:14==
2
Related Work
Recent research has explored how LLMs can be used for visual biometric tasks. A study
in this direction by DeAndres­Tame et al. [32] provides the first systematic evaluation of
GPT­4’s multimodal abilities for FR. Although GPT­4 is not trained as a face recognition
model, the authors show that it can perform zero­shot similarity judgements with high ac­
curacy under controlled settings. They benchmark GPT­4 against CNN­based models
like ArcFace and AdaFace. GPT­4 performs notably worse in unconstrained, low­quality,
or demographically diverse scenarios, but achieves competitive results on high­quality
images. The study also demonstrates GPT­4’s strength in estimating soft­biometric at­
tributes (e.g., gender, age group, hair type, facial accessories). Most importantly, the au­
thors emphasize GPT­4’s unique advantage: its built­in ability to provide natural­language
justifications for its decisions. These explanations offer interpretability not available in con­
ventional FR systems. However, the authors also highlight key limitations: strong safety
constraints that sometimes block identity­related outputs, inconsistent confidence report­
ing, and a lack of robustness to image quality and demographic variation. Their findings
suggest that while ChatGPT is not a replacement for specialized recognition systems, it
opens new research directions in explainability.
Another relevant work is FaceXBench by Narayan et al. [33], which introduces a bench­
mark for evaluating multimodal LLMs on facial analysis tasks. Their benchmark involves
identity reasoning, cross­image comparisons, and face image quality estimation. Mod­
els are evaluated through question–answer prompts.
Methodologically, FaceXBench
shares similarities with the present study in its use of standardized prompts, controlled
datasets, and quantitative scoring to assess LLMs. Both approaches evaluate model
consistency, visual understanding, and the ability to identify facial properties from images.
However, the scope of FaceXBench is broader. It covers multiple biometric scenarios,
while the current work focuses specifically on ICAO compliance classification and defect
identification. Another distinction lies in evaluation. FaceXBench measures task success
through accuracy on predefined questions, while the present work introduces a four­line
output format to capture compliance, defect category, severity, and justification. More­
over, FaceXBench does not compare LLM outputs to a standards­based FIQA algorithm,
while comparison with OFIQ is a core part of the methodology used here.
Beyond these FIQA­related evaluations, several studies have investigated the capabil­
ities and limitations of multimodal LLMs. Liu et al. [34] explore how extended reasoning
chains in MLLMs can improve performance on complex tasks, but at the cost of increased
visual hallucination. They show that as reasoning chains grow longer, models tend to rely
more heavily on language priors and reduce attention to visual inputs.
Varga [35] evaluates multimodal LLMs on no­reference image quality assessment. The
study demonstrates that while models such as GPT­4 and Claude perform well in most
scenarios, they still fall short compared to specialized deep convolutional networks.
Li et al. [36] examine the phenomenon of object hallucination in large vision­language
models. Their evaluation shows that the models frequently describe or “add” objects
that are not present in the input images. This happens especially when those objects
commonly appear in visual­instruction datasets or frequently co­occur with other elements
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
8
==PAGE:15==
the model detects. This shows the reliance of LLMs on language priors, ignoring visual
information.
These works show that multimodal LLMs perform well at reasoning and natural lan­
guage explanations, yet they often struggle with precise visual perception. This limitation
is especially relevant for face recognition and quality assessment, where subtle defects,
such as gaze, could be easily overlooked.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Methodology
This chapter describes the experimental methodology used in this work. The workflow
included dataset preparation, model selection, prompt design, and evaluation. Vision­
capable LLMs were tested on a crafted dataset, containing both compliant and non­compliant
facial images. Their outputs were compared across prompt variants and models to deter­
mine how well they classify compliance and identify specific image defects. An initial
benchmarking phase was conducted to evaluate multiple models and identify the best­
performing LLM, which was then selected for an in­depth analysis.
The diagram below (3.1) illustrates the workflow used in this research. The process
begins with a dataset of facial images, which are analyzed by an LLM. In parallel, the
OFIQ algorithm is used to extract reference quality scores for comparison. The resulting
outputs are collected and evaluated within a benchmarking setup that measures class
accuracy, defect accuracy, and overall quality scores. The quality of human­readable
feedback is then assessed manually. This process is repeated for all selected models.
Each LLM receives the same images and prompt instructions to classify image compliance
and describe detected defects. During this process, parts of the workflow are fine­tuned
to achieve the best possible performance.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the workflow designed in this work.
3.1
Dataset
Two synthetic datasets were used in this study: the TONO1 and ONOT2 datasets.
1https://miatbiolab.csr.unibo.it/tono-synthetic-dataset/
2https://miatbiolab.csr.unibo.it/icao-synthetic-dataset/
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 10
==PAGE:17==
• The TONO dataset was specifically designed for testing ICAO compliance and in­
cludes subsets of images with isolated defects such as the subject wearing sun­
glasses, pose variations, background non­compliance, illumination inconsistencies,
and occlusions. By having each defect type isolated and labeled, the dataset allows
for straightforward evaluation of model performance in both classification and defect
identification tasks.
• The ONOT dataset was used as a complementary source of fully compliant face
images.
An equal number of compliant and non­compliant images were chosen at random from
the datasets to ensure a balanced evaluation.
Non­compliant images were sampled
evenly across defect types. The files were labeled based on their compliance and de­
fect types for easier evaluation in the future. Each test iteration used the same subset of
images to allow fair comparison between prompt versions and models.
3.2
Model Selection
Vision­capable LLMs were retrieved from the Ollama platform3 and tested on a subset of
images. Models were evaluate on their ability to classify compliance and detect specific
defects. The top­performing model was then selected for detailed testing with a larger
dataset.
Table 3.1: LLMs evaluated
Name
Size
BakLLaVA
7B
Gemma3
4B
Gemma3
12B
Gemma3
27B
Granite3.2­Vision
2B
LLaVA
7B
LLaVA
13B
LLaVA
34B
LLaVA­LLaMA3
8B
LLaVA­Phi­3.3
8B
MiniCPM­V
8B
Moondream­1
8B
Mistral­Small3.1
24B
Mistral­Small3.2
24B
Qwen2.5VL
3B
Qwen2.5VL
7B
Qwen2.5VL
32B
3.3
Prompt Testing
The models were evaluated using an iterative process where prompts were adjusted
depending on results. Initially, simple prompts were presented, asking the models to de­
scribe images in order to assess their basic recognition abilities. Later, LLMs were asked
3https://ollama.com/
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 11
==PAGE:18==
to classify images based on their compliance. At first, without context, and later with ad­
ditional information about defect types and ICAO standards. Finally, prompts requesting
quality scores and descriptions of detected defects were applied.
3.4
Evaluation
During the LLM runs, log files were generated that recorded the prompt, the corre­
sponding image, the model used, and the produced output. Initially, manual evaluation
was done for troubleshooting. However, to ensure consistent assessment, an automated
evaluation algorithm was implemented. Thanks to the initial dataset preparation, where
images were labeled by compliance and defect type, LLM outputs could be compared.
The evaluation used a semantic comparison approach, where the names of the defect la­
bels were mapped to the model’s responses through a dictionary. Metrics were calculated
based on this comparison procedure.
Classification accuracy was computed as the proportion of correctly classified images
(compliant vs. non­compliant) over all evaluated samples. Individual defect accuracy was
defined as the proportion of non­compliant images for which the predicted defect category
matched the ground­truth label.
3.5
Hardware and Environment
The experiments were first conducted on a standard consumer device with a mid­range
processor, 32 GB of RAM, and a mid­tier graphics card. As the computational needs
increased, particularly for larger models, a high­performance remote server was used.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 12
==PAGE:19==
4
Implementation
4.1
Dataset
To prepare the datasets for testing, a Python­based preprocessing pipeline was imple­
mented to merge, label, and sample images from the TONO and ONOT datasets. The
script standardized filenames, ensured balanced class representation, and created sub­
sets of images for later evaluation.
First, all TONO images were copied from their original subdirectories and renamed ac­
cording to their defect type. The compliant images from the ONOT dataset were then
randomly sampled and renamed with a uniform compliant_ prefix. All images were or­
ganized into three categories, with non­compliant ones further broken down into defect
types, as shown below:







subject : {head_covering, eyes_closed, gaze, smile, sunglasses, pose, makeup}
capture : {background, light, exposure, focus, resolution, saturation, posterization, zoom}
compliant : {compliant}
The create_data_sample() function was used to generate balanced test sets. This func­
tion selected an equal number of compliant and non­compliant images, evenly distributed
across defect categories. The images were sampled at random from the directories. Each
test iteration used the same subset of images to ensure a fair comparison between differ­
ent LLMs and prompt configurations.
1
def create_data_sample(compliant_dir , defect_dir , category_type="all",
num_images=100):
Listing 4.1: Dataset sampling function used to generate test sets.
This automated setup ensured reproducibility and balance across defect types. At first,
a small sample of 20 images was used for troubleshooting and manual evaluation. Later,
subsets of 200 images were used for model benchmarking, while the final phase used
2000 images after narrowing the selection to the best­performing LLM.
4.2
LLM Requests
The interaction with language models was automated using Python scripts that inter­
faced with the Ollama API running locally. Initially, a simple version of the script iterated
through all available models and prompts, sending each image for analysis and saving
the raw responses to text files. Each request included the model name, the prompt, and
a base64­encoded version of the image. Encoding the images ensured that the models
could not infer defects or compliance from the file names, enforcing a visual evaluation.
Over time, targeted testing was made possible by reworking the implementation into a
modular pipeline. With randomized image ordering, this version allowed the execution of
specific model–prompt combinations. Each run produced result files containing the model
used, the prompt, the images analyzed, and the model responses.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 13
==PAGE:20==
To ensure consistent inference, the keep_alive flag of the Ollama API was tested. It
was initially assumed that maintaining a live session could bias subsequent responses by
retaining context between calls. However, no measurable difference was observed. Thus,
sessions were only reset whenever switching to another LLM. Additionally, all images were
fed to the models in a randomized order to avoid any potential ordering effects. Each
model’s output was stored in timestamped folders, forming a dataset for later evaluation.
The following function shows the workflow for analyzing a batch of images with a given
model and prompt:
1
def analyze_image(image_path , model, prompt , reset_session=False):
2
base64_image = encode_image(image_path)
3
response = requests.post('http://localhost:11434/api/generate',
4
json={'model': model, 'prompt': prompt , 'images': [base64_image], '
stream': False})
5
if response.status_code == 200:
6
return response.json()['response']
Listing 4.2: Function for evaluating images with a selected LLM and prompt.
Response Refinement
The evaluation process initially used general instructions such as “Describe this image
in detail” or “Tell whether this image is compliant with ICAO standards.” However, such
open­ended questions produced inconsistent responses. To improve reliability and to
enable easier evaluation, prompts needed to progress and become more structured.
Each prompt required the model to produce a response in a strict four­line format:
1. COMPLIANT or NON­COMPLIANT
2. A numerical score from 1 to 100 to describe the severity of the defect
3. The defect label (if non­compliant)
4. A text­based justification of the choice made
In later iterations, more context was added to the prompts. The models were given descrip­
tions of the defect types, together with the related ICAO compliance rules. This helped
the models work within a clearer framework, making the assessments more consistent
with ICAO standards. This, in turn, led to the responses being machine­readable and
semantically comparable.
4.3
Evaluation
Baseline Implementation
In the initial version, each model’s responses were stored in plain text files for every tested
prompt and model configuration. These outputs were inspected manually, then parsed
through basic pattern comparison to determine compliance decisions. However, this early
approach presented several limitations:
• Manual evaluation was not feasible on larger test sets.
• The parsing was not standardized, and small formatting variations caused mismatches.
• Classification accuracy and defect identification accuracy were not differentiated.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 14
==PAGE:21==
Refined Evaluation Pipeline
To overcome these limitations, an improved evaluation module was implemented. This
updated version introduced a few upgrades:
• Automated parsing: Model outputs were parsed using regular expressions to extract
image names, compliance status, and assigned scores.
• Fuzzy keyword comparison: A keyword­based fuzzy comparison system was imple­
mented to account for textual variations (e.g., “closed eyes” vs. “eyes closed”).
• The evaluation now considered two aspects: classification accuracy and defect ac­
curacy.
• Category­level statistics: Accuracy rates were computed per defect type.
• Score extraction: In non­compliant scenarios, quality scores were extracted and
stored to quantify the defect severity perceived by the model.
Each LLM’s results were evaluated individually and then summarized into an aggregate
file.
4.3.1
FIQA Evaluation using OFIQ
The OFIQ algorithm was used to set a reference point for later comparison against
LLM outputs. It was executed as a standalone binary using a Python wrapper script.
All generated results were saved as CSV files containing multiple scalar quality metrics,
such as Unified Quality Score. A post­processing step converted these CSV outputs into a
simplified summary, extracting and normalizing selected traits for easier comparison. The
normalization was necessary because some metrics gave high scores to compliant cases,
while others gave high scores to non­compliant cases. To enable consistent interpretation,
all metrics were adjusted so that higher values represented stronger defects or lower
compliance.
Cross­Comparison Between LLM and OFIQ Scores
LLM scores were compared with OFIQ’s metrics to evaluate how well the LLM­generated
quality scores measured ICAO compliance. An early attempt to use OFIQ’s Unified Quality
Score was set aside, as this aggregate measure includes many image characteristics not
covered in the present defect set. Thus, the comparison focuses only on non­compliant
images, on a per­image basis. The LLM­assigned score was matched with the corre­
sponding feature­specific OFIQ score. After these pairings were created, distributions
were calculated and visualized through per­defect histograms to determine how closely
the LLM outputs aligned with OFIQ.
4.4
Result Visualization
To make model comparison easier, a Python­based visualization tool was implemented
using pandas and matplotlib. The script parses the result text file generated during
each run and extracts classification and defect accuracy for each model. These results
are displayed in bar charts, one for overall classification accuracy and one for overall
defect detection accuracy. In addition, the script also visualizes single defect per­category
results.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 15
==PAGE:22==
5
Experimental Results
This chapter presents the results of the conducted experiments, including model bench­
marking, prompt development, quantitative and qualitative evaluation. The results are
organized in chronological order, following the experimental workflow described in the
Methodology chapter.
5.1
Prompt development
The experimentation process followed an iterative approach, where each round of re­
sults influenced the direction of new prompts. At first, simple prompts were used to as­
sess the LLMs’ basic vision capabilities. Observing the variability in outputs highlighted
the need for a more structured prompt. Based on these observations, the prompt was
refined to frame the model into the role of a face recognition expert, giving it more and
more context in later iterations.
Feasibility Tests
At the beginning of the experimentation process, a small subset of non­compliant im­
ages was selected to perform quick feasibility tests. The goal was to see how different
LLMs respond to visual input. The task given to the models at this stage was intentionally
simple:
“Describe this image in detail.”
Even in this early stage, the results were promising. The models were able to produce
coherent and accurate image descriptions. The responses were verbose in general, al­
though some models produced shorter outputs.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 16
==PAGE:23==
Gemma3:12B
Overall Impression: The image is a medium­close­up portrait of
a distinguished­looking elderly man . The lighting is even , and the
background is a plain , solid white. The focus is squarely on his face, high­
lighting his character and expression.
The Man:
• Age and Appearance: The man appears to be in his late 70s or 80s.
He has a weathered face with wrinkles indicating a life well­lived. His
skin tone is fair , and he has a slight redness around his cheeks.
• Facial Traits: He has a prominent nose and a
slightly downturned mouth . His eyes are dark and appear to be
gazing slightly off­camera .
• Hair and Beard: He has a long, flowing, white beard , which is neatly
groomed. His hair is also white and receding , neatly styled.
• Expression: He has a neutral, thoughtful expression , with a hint of a
smile.
Clothing:
• He is wearing a burgundy or dark red jacket with gold trim around
the collar , cuffs, and buttons .
• He is wearing a black tie , and a small decorative pin or emblem is
attached to it.
Accessories:
• He is wearing a white baseball cap with a blue ”AP” logo on it . The
cap is slightly curved and looks well­worn.
Overall Impression: The image is a portrait that exudes character and a
sense of dignity. The clothing and accessories, especially the baseball cap,
suggest a certain formality or perhaps a role that requires a polished appear­
ance.
Figure 5.1: Example of Gemma3:12b response using a simple prompt
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 17
==PAGE:24==
The response in Figure 5.1 shows that Gemma3:12b generates detailed and well­structured
descriptions even from a minimal prompt. The description is verbose, which can be infor­
mative for human interpretation but is less suitable for automated evaluation. It correctly
identifies several key attributes, such as the subject’s age, presence of a beard, clothing,
and baseball cap. However, while the overall assessment is largely accurate, the output
also contains a few incorrect statements. In the figure (and in the rest of this chapter),
correct statements are marked in green and incorrect ones in red .
“The image traits a man donning a white baseball cap emblazoned with the
”Ape” logo on its front , set against a plain backdrop .”
Figure 5.2: Response of Granite3.2 for the same image and prompt
Figure 5.2 shows the response generated by Granite3.2 for the same image. Compared
to Gemma3 (Figure 5.1), this output shows fewer details, but is still accurate.
These examples illustrate the variance in output style between models. While both de­
scriptions are accurate, the difference in verbosity presents a challenge when comparing
model outputs.
Compliance Classification Prompt
After the initial descriptive task, LLMs were given a prompt in which they were asked to
perform a classification task. This prompt was applied to the same set of non­compliant
images, and the LLMs were asked to classify each image as either compliant or non­
compliant, and to provide an explanation in case of a defect. The purpose of this stage was
to test the ability of LLMs to conform to an FIQA evaluation scenario. Results indicated that
LLMs were able to identify obvious defects, such as occlusions, but there was variation
in how detailed their classifications were. This stage also allowed for the first quantitative
comparison between models, measuring their classification accuracy against the ground
truth.
“You are now a face recognition expert. I give you an image; you have to tell
if it is compliant with ICAO standards, and if not, tell me what the defect is.
Here is the image:”
Figure 5.3: Introducing the classification scenario into the prompt
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 18
==PAGE:25==
mistral­small3.2:24b
To determine if the provided image complies with ICAO standards for facial
recognition, we need to check several criteria:
1. Neutral Expression: The subject should have a neutral facial
expression with both eyes open and visible, mouth closed.
2. Lighting: The face should be evenly lit without shadows.
3. Head Position: The head should be straight, not tilted, and the subject
should be looking directly at the camera.
4. Background: The background should be plain and of a contrasting
color to the subject’s face.
5. Clothing: Clothing should not obscure the face or shoulders.
6. Glasses: Glasses are allowed but should not have reflective or tinted
lenses that obscure the eyes.
Analysis of the Provided Image:
• Expression: The subject has a neutral expression with eyes open
and mouth closed .
• Lighting: The face is evenly lit without shadows .
• Head Position: The head is straight , and the subject is looking
directly at the camera .
• Background: The background is plain and of a contrasting color.
• Clothing: The clothing does not obscure the face or shoulders.
• Glasses: The subject is wearing sunglasses with tinted lenses, which
obscure the eyes .
Conclusion: The image does not comply with ICAO standards because the
sunglasses with tinted lenses obscure the eyes . For the image to be com­
pliant, the subject should remove the sunglasses or use clear lenses that do
not obscure the eyes.
Figure 5.4: Mistral­small3.2:24b response for ICAO compliance evaluation of the provided
image.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 19
==PAGE:26==
The response in Figure 5.4, generated by Mistral­small3.2:24b, assesses ICAO compli­
ance despite not being explicitly provided with standards­related context. The aspects it
evaluates are indeed part of ICAO compliance rules, though they represent only a sub­
set of the full specification. This response shows that the model can infer the needed
information and is also capable of reasoning about the compliance of the image.
“The woman in the image does not meet ICAO standards
for sunglasses .
This is because her glasses are not positioned on top of her head as re­
quired by the standards. Additionally, her collar appears to be loose , which
could potentially cause the glasses to slip down her nose or face , further
causing noncompliance with the regulations.”
Figure 5.5: Response of BakLLaVA using the same image and prompt
The response in Figure 5.5 illustrates a very different behavior from the BakLLaVA model.
Although the model arrives at a correct non­compliant label, its explanation is incorrect
and irrelevant to the task. The model invents requirements (e.g., that glasses must be
“positioned on top of the head”) and even comments on unrelated clothing details. In other
words, the model does not merely provide flawed reasoning, it loses track of the task and
”hallucinates” compliance criteria. This example highlights a key challenge: models can
produce plausible­sounding explanations while being completely wrong.
Detailed Context Prompt
In the next phase of prompt refinement, more and more context about ICAO compliance
was provided to the language models. The final version, presented in Appendix A, was
produced after multiple iterations. The detailed instructions were designed to minimize
unsupported assumptions and to prevent incorrect ICAO standards from being generated
by the models. Furthermore, a strict output structure was specified to allow automated
evaluation of the responses.
Non Compliant
90
smile
The subject is smiling , showing visible teeth , which is
not in compliance with the ICAO standard requiring a neu­
tral expression with a closed mouth.
Figure 5.6: Qwen response for large context prompt.
The inclusion of context was found to have a positive effect on larger models. With the
additional information and clearly defined output structure, precise responses were pro­
duced, correctly identifying ICAO compliance issues and providing sound reasoning.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 20
==PAGE:27==
This image is: Non compliant .
The primary issue with this image is the lighting which is not uniform , and
there are noticeable shadows on the face , particularly on the right side. This
can obscure facial traits and make it difficult for face recognition algorithms
to accurately identify the individual. Additionally, the background is not plain
and light­colored, which further detracts from the image’s suitability for face
recognition.
Figure 5.7: Smaller model (LLaVA­Phi­3.3:8B), producing a correct classification but giv­
ing wrong reasoning and not respecting the response format.
This stage marked the point where differences between language models became ap­
parent. While larger models were capable of identifying multiple compliance issues and
providing reasoning, smaller models began to struggle with the complexity of the prompt.
Their responses became less accurate and would often not adhere to the requested re­
sponse structure.
5.2
Output Evaluation
For each test image, the ground truth label was compared against the model’s detected
issue. Two key metrics were computed:
• Classification Accuracy: Measures whether the model correctly identified an image
as compliant or non­compliant.
• Defect Detection Accuracy: Measures whether the model correctly identified the
specific defect present in the image, based on keyword comparison between the
model’s response and the known defect.
Some representative evaluation snippets are shown below:
Image: compliant_648.png
Defect: compliant
Detected issue: compliant (matched keywords: 0)
Classification correct: True
Defect matched: False
Image: head_covering_200.png
Defect: head_covering
Detected issue: head_covering (matched keywords: 1)
Classification correct: True
Defect matched: True
Image: gaze_345.png
Defect: gaze
Detected issue: smile (matched keywords: 1)
Classification correct: True
Defect matched: False
Figure 5.8: Evaluation examples
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 21
==PAGE:28==
5.3
LLM Benchmarking
This section presents the results of benchmarking the different LLMs on their ICAO
compliance assessment. The evaluation focuses on classification and defect identification
accuracy.
Figure 5.9: Classification Accuracy
Figure 5.9 shows a bar chart of the classification accuracies of all evaluated LLMs, sorted
in descending order. A first observation is that many models have an accuracy of exactly
50%. This is due to the structure of the test dataset, which consisted of 200 images, half
of which were compliant. When prompted with the extended context described earlier,
several models became ”fixated” and categorized all images as non­compliant. As a re­
sult, only the models achieving accuracies above 50% are truly performing well. In this
benchmarking, Qwen2.5vl:32B and Qwen2.5vl:7B emerge as the strongest performers.
Llava:34B also achieves accuracy reasonably above the baseline, whereas all remaining
models fall short. This finding is particularly interesting given that every model included
in this stage had previously demonstrated strong performance in the description task. In
other words, these models are capable of understanding the image and producing accu­
rate descriptions, yet they perform poorly on the classification task. A likely explanation
is the extended prompt context used at this stage. The complex prompt appears to am­
plify the strengths of the more capable models while causing weaker models to fall further
behind.
Figure 5.10: Defect Detection Accuracy
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.10 shows a bar chart of the defect detection accuracies for all evaluated LLMs.
Compared to the classification accuracy, the defect accuracies are much more varied,
revealing some surprising results. The smaller models generally perform much worse on
this task. The test suite is the same as for the classification benchmark, meaning the
same images and models were used. In this evaluation, Mistral­small3.2:24B achieved
the highest defect accuracy, though only by a small margin compared to Qwen2.5vl:32B.
Other models such as Mistral­small3.1:24B, Gemma3:27B, and the smaller Qwen variants
also performed well.
Table 5.1: Category­wise accuracy of LLMs
LLM
eyes_cl
gaze
head_cov makeup
pose
smile
sunglas
Avg
mistral­small3.2_24b
86.7
57.1
100.0
92.9
57.1
28.6
100.0
74.7
qwen2.5vl_32b
100.0
7.1
100.0
100.0
0.0
85.7
100.0
70.6
mistral­small3.1_24b
60.0
7.1
100.0
92.9
14.3
92.9
100.0
66.5
gemma3_27b
33.3
100.0
28.6
64.3
0.0
92.9
100.0
60.4
qwen2.5vl_7b
100.0
0.0
85.7
85.7
0.0
0.0
93.3
52.7
gemma3_4b
46.7
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.0
llava_7b
0.0
21.4
21.4
21.4
42.9
0.0
6.7
16.3
gemma3_12b
0.0
78.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11.2
llava_34b
0.0
14.3
7.1
21.4
0.0
7.1
20.0
10.0
llava­phi3_3.8b
20.0
0.0
0.0
14.3
21.4
0.0
0.0
8.2
bakllava_7b
0.0
28.6
0.0
0.0
7.1
0.0
0.0
5.4
llava_13b
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.4
0.0
6.7
3.7
qwen2.5vl_3b
6.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.1
0.0
0.0
1.7
llava­llama3_8b
0.0
7.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
granite3.2­vision_2b
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
moondream_1.8b
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
minicpm­v_8b
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 5.1 presents the category­wise defect detection accuracies for all evaluated LLMs.
It is evident that smaller models generally fail to detect most types of defects and perform
poorly overall. Interestingly, even among the better­performing models, there are notable
differences in their strengths and weaknesses. For example, the Mistral models achieve
high accuracy across most defect categories but struggle with facial expressions such as
smile detection. In contrast, the Qwen models show very high accuracy for most defects,
yet their performance on gaze and pose is remarkably low. This analysis highlights that
while larger models outperform smaller ones overall, their capabilities are not uniform
across all defect types. Many of the zero­accuracy values observed for these models
stem from their failure to follow the required output structure. In several cases, smaller
models output only a compliance classification and ignore the other tasks specified in the
prompt.
Considering both classification and defect detection results, the large Qwen2.5vl:32B
model was selected as the overall best, with a classification accuracy of 83% and a defect
accuracy of 71%.
It is important to note that this benchmarking focuses exclusively on subject­related
defects. Capture­related issues were not included in the presented results. Preliminary
testing showed that LLMs struggled to assess these conditions reliably. Across all eval­
uated models, classification accuracy for capture­related defects remained low, with the
best­performing configuration reaching only around 30%, while most models achieved
below 10%, a level comparable to guessing. Most likely because their visual attention
mechanisms prioritize the detected face and tend to down­weight or even ignore sur­
rounding information. This behavior is also reflected in the LLM outputs. LLMs almost
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 23
==PAGE:30==
never classify an image as having a capture­related defect, even when the prompts ex­
plicitly instruct them to pay additional attention to these kinds of defects. This behavior
aligns with findings in the literature. Research shows that vision–language models tend
to prioritize salient objects, especially faces. Several studies report strong center bias,
implicit cropping, and object­first attention patterns [37, 38, 39, 40], which explains their
difficulty in reliably detecting capture­related defects. Although LLMs perform poorly on
capture­related defects, this does not reduce the relevance of the findings. In real­world
environments, capture­related defects can be more easily controlled by operators who
manage the camera setup, whereas subject­related defects depend on user behavior.
For these reasons, the analysis concentrates on the defect types for which consistent
and interpretable LLM behavior could be observed.
5.4
Extended Evaluation with Qwen2.5vl:32B
Following the benchmarking experiments, the Qwen2.5vl:32B model was selected for
further evaluation based on its strong overall performance. To verify the model’s robust­
ness, the test suite was expanded from 200 to 2000 images, consisting of an equal number
of compliant and non­compliant samples. The results from this larger­scale evaluation re­
mained consistent with the previous findings. Qwen2.5vl:32B continued to demonstrate
high overall accuracy in classification tasks while maintaining strong performance across
most defect categories. However, the model still struggled with handling certain types of
visual cues, mostly those related to gaze and pose.
Table 5.2: Qwen2.5vl:32B performance on expanded test suite (2000 images)
Model
eyes_cl
gaze
head_cov
makeup
pose
smile
sunglas
Avg Def.
Qwen2.5vl_32B
90.3
20.1
100.0
99.3
1.4
83.8
100.0
70.7
Classification accuracy:
86.5
5.5
Natural Language Qualitative Analysis
While the previous sections focused on quantitative evaluation metrics, this section
explores the qualitative performance of the LLMs. Specifically, the descriptive responses
generated by the models when identifying compliance defects.
Unlike classification tasks, free­text responses are much harder to quantify objectively, as
there is no clear framework for automated evaluation. Instead, this assessment is based
on manual inspection of representative examples. Overall, this analysis indicates that
the responses are coherent and contextually appropriate, especially when the underlying
defect prediction is correct. However, the responses seem convincing even when the
underlying classification is incorrect.
While numerical quality metrics are informative for algorithmic evaluation, they are often
difficult for human operators to interpret directly. When FIQA systems output multiple
scalar indicators, understanding why an image is considered non­compliant may not be
immediately clear. In such cases, descriptive language from the LLM can bridge the gap
between technical assessment and human interpretability.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 24
==PAGE:31==
Prediction: Compliant
Quality Score: 10
Defect: none
Model response: This image is compliant because
it complies with the ICAO standard. The subject is
centered, upright , and facing directly toward the camera
with a neutral expression , and both eyes are fully
open and clearly visible . There are no signs of
headwear, makeup , or other issues that would cause non­
compliance.
Figure 5.11: Example of a qualitative response by Qwen for a compliant sample.
For example, Figure 5.11 shows a case where the model correctly identifies a compliant
image and provides detailed justification, listing key points assessed.
However, as illustrated in Figure 5.12, the model may sometimes provide incorrect classi­
fications while maintaining correct and consistent justifications. This highlights a limitation
of free­text explanations: they can sound plausible even when the underlying classifica­
tion is incorrect. In real­world deployment, this could mislead operators. Nevertheless,
these qualitative outputs remain valuable for understanding how the model perceives fa­
cial attributes. The textual descriptions showcase whether the model focuses on gaze
direction, head pose, or facial expression.
Prediction:
Compliant
Quality score: 10
Defect: no defect
Model response: This image is compliant because it com­
plies with the ICAO standard. The subject is centered ,
facing directly toward the camera , with a neutral expression ,
and both eyes are fully open and clearly visible. The head is
in a proper frontal position without any rotation or tilt be­
yond acceptable limits. There are no head coverings ,
makeup, or sunglasses that obscure the face.
Figure 5.12: Example of a qualitative response by Qwen for an image wrongly classified
(defect = gaze).
Figure 5.13 presents a correctly classified non­compliant image, describing the presence
of makeup as the defect.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 25
==PAGE:32==
Prediction: Non­compliant
Quality score: 90
Defect: makeup
Model response: The image is non­compliant be­
cause the subject is wearing heavy makeup , includ­
ing colorful
eyeshadow that significantly alters their
natural appearance . This does not comply with the ICAO
standard, which requires a natural face without exaggerated
coloration or contouring.
Figure 5.13: Example of a qualitative response by Qwen for an image classified correctly,
with defect identification.
5.6
Test with Real Images
To ensure that the findings obtained from the synthetic dataset were not biased by the
generation process, an additional test was conducted using a smaller set of real images.
These were provided in the sample data distributed with the OFIQ GitHub repository 1.
The results confirmed that the models’ strengths and weaknesses remained consistent
across both datasets.
Prediction:
Compliant
Quality Score: 15
Defect: none
Model response: This image is compliant because it complies
with the ICAO standard. The subject is centered , facing di­
rectly toward the camera , with a neutral expression , and the
background is plain and light­colored . The lighting is even , and
the image is in focus with appropriate resolution and saturation .
Figure 5.14: Qwen not recognizing a background defect
As illustrated in Figures 5.14 and 5.15, the model demonstrates similar behavior on real im­
ages as it did with the synthetic dataset. Specifically, it continues to struggle with capture­
related defects (Fig. 5.14), where it fails to recognize the non­plain background. In con­
trast, for more subject­based defects (Fig. 5.15), the model performs reliably, correctly
identifying the issue and providing sound reasoning.
1https://github.com/BSI-OFIQ/OFIQ-Project
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 26
==PAGE:33==
Prediction:
Non Compliant
Quality Score: 35
Defect:
head_covering
Model response: The subject is wearing a face mask , which
obscures a significant portion of the face . According to ICAO
standards, only religious or medical head coverings are permitted,
and they must not cast shadows on the face or obscure facial
traits. The face mask in this image does not meet these criteria,
making the image non­compliant.
Figure 5.15: Model correctly identifying head covering as defect
5.7
Comparison with OFIQ Scores
To further contextualize the performance of the LLM, the quality scores generated by
Qwen2.5vl:32B were compared with the corresponding OFIQ measures. While the LLM
assigns a score based on its visual understanding, OFIQ provides indicators derived from
algorithmic evaluations. It is important to emphasize that OFIQ scores do not represent
absolute thresholds for compliance or quality. Some OFIQ measures may remain high
even when the visual attribute in question is clearly suboptimal. This behavior depends
on the specific algorithm used to compute each measure, meaning that high OFIQ values
do not necessarily correspond to visually ideal conditions. On the contrart in certain cases,
low values represent better compliance.
A perfect alignment between the LLM’s quality scores and OFIQ indicators is not expected,
even though both produce scores from 0 to 100. The LLM was explicitly asked to provide
a score representing the severity of any defect, with higher scores indicating greater non­
compliance and lower scores indicating compliance. Therefore, some of OFIQ’s mea­
sures were normalized to align with the LLM scale.
Table 5.3: LLM accuracy and mean scores across defect types
Metric
Head_Cov
Mkup
Sungl
Smile
Eyes_Cl
Gaze
Pose
LLM Acc. (%)
100.00
99.30
100.00
83.80
90.34
20.14
1.41
Mean LLM
90.00
89.44
90.00
77.61
90.41
30.00
36.41
Mean OFIQ
87.86
98.84
99.75
52.07
54.75
80.44
90.42
|∆| (LLM–OFIQ)
2.14
9.40
9.75
25.54
35.66
50.44
54.01
Figure 5.16 shows the comparison between LLM and OFIQ score distributions for each
defect type, while Table 5.3 summarizes these findings.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Head Covering
(b) Makeup
(c) Gaze
(d) Sunglasses
(e) Eyes Closed
(f) Smile
(g) Pose
(h) Legend
Figure 5.16: Comparison of LLM vs OFIQ scores for each defect type
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 28
==PAGE:35==
A general observation across all plots is that the LLM’s score distribution is highly discrete,
with values concentrated around 10 and 90, indicating a near­binary decision pattern.
This suggests that the LLM tends to make categorical judgments rather than expressing
degrees of confidence. In contrast, OFIQ scores vary continuously, presenting a more
graded perception of defect severity. This is particularly visible in Smile (Fig. 5.16f) and
Eyes Closed (Fig. 5.16e), where the OFIQ histograms are broader and more uniformly
distributed, while the LLM’s are concentrated near the extremes.
From Table 5.3, we observe that Head Covering (Fig. 5.16a), Makeup (Fig. 5.16b), and
Sunglasses (Fig. 5.16d) exhibit the lowest absolute differences between mean LLM and
OFIQ scores, below 10 points. This can be attributed to the LLM’s very high accuracy
(≈99–100%). Furthermore, this behavior is consistent with the binary nature of these
defects, where subjects either wear sunglasses and head coverings or not. Furthermore,
the synthetic database applies makeup in a very noticeable way, reducing ambiguity in
detection.
Smile (Fig. 5.16f) and Eyes Closed (Fig. 5.16e) show moderate discrepancies of about
25–35 points. Although the LLM accuracy remains high in these cases (84 and 90%),
OFIQ scores vary substantially, suggesting that OFIQ captures more nuanced expres­
sions, such as a partial smile, whereas the LLM simplifies these cases into binary out­
comes.
Finally, Gaze (Fig. 5.16c) and Pose (Fig. 5.16g) exhibit the largest discrepancies, ex­
ceeding 50 points. This large gap is largely due to the very low LLM accuracy in detecting
these attributes. In particular, Pose shows an accuracy of only ≈1.4%, with the LLM’s
histogram concentrated at low values, reflecting frequent misclassifications.
Overall, these results indicate that while the LLM performs reliably for most defects, it
struggles with continuous or subtle visual attributes like gaze direction or expression in­
tensity. Meanwhile, OFIQ provides a more consistent and graded quality representation.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 29
==PAGE:36==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the experimental findings in relation to prior research on multi­
modal LLMs and FIQA.
6.1
Prompt Sensitivity
A key observation in this study is the strong dependence of model performance on the
level of detail provided by the prompt. Larger models achieved better results when given
an extended prompt, whereas smaller models frequently misinterpreted instructions or
failed to adhere to the output format. This behavior is consistent with earlier findings on
multimodal reasoning. Prior work shows that longer or more complex reasoning chains
often cause models to drift away from visual grounding. Liu et al. [34] demonstrate that
models tend to rely on language priors instead of image content. Likewise, Li et al. [36]
show that vision­capable LLMs often hallucinate objects that commonly appear together
in training data.
The present findings align with these observations: explicit prompts help but cannot fully
compensate for the model’s tendency to treat the task as a language­generation problem
rather than a perceptual one. Prompt engineering improves consistency, but architectural
limitations remain the dominant factor.
6.2
Comparison with Traditional FIQA Systems
Traditional FIQA systems rely on geometric measurements. These systems perform
well at detecting subtle pose deviations, lighting inconsistencies, and landmark­based de­
fects. In contrast, the LLMs evaluated in this study show a very different performance pro­
file. Qwen is particularly strong in identifying certain defects such as sunglasses, closed
eyes, or the presence of obstructions, but performs poorly on geometric criteria such as
pose deviations or gaze shifts. This matches the observations of Tong et al. [41] that
CLIP­based models lack fine­grained visual discrimination and struggle with low­level ge­
ometric patterns.
Another behavior observed in the experiments is the tendency of some models to default
to “non­compliant’’ outputs. This resembles a risk­averse bias documented in earlier mul­
timodal studies [42], [43], [44], where models prefer conservative answers when uncertain
or when instructions contain strict constraints. In the FIQA setting, this kind of behavior
limits operational value.
6.3
Plausible but Incorrect Justifications
An important qualitative finding concerns the explanations generated by the models.
When predictions are correct, the explanations are informative and well aligned with ICAO
criteria. However, when the models are incorrect, the explanations remain fluent and con­
fident despite being unfaithful to the visual evidence. This behavior reflects a broader
issue identified by prior research on LLM hallucination and explanation faithfulness. Stud­
ies such as Liu et al. [34] and Li et al. [36] show that hallucinations often arise from
language priors rather than image­grounded reasoning, which is consistent with the er­
rors observed in this work.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 30
==PAGE:37==
This tendency poses challenges in safety­critical applications such as identity verification.
Convincing natural language explanations may increase operator trust even when the
underlying classification is unreliable. As a result, while LLMs offer better interpretability
compared to traditional FIQA systems, the explanations cannot be assumed to reflect the
true decision­making process without extra verification.
6.4
Implications for ICAO Compliance Evaluation
FIQA research typically relies on quantitative image measures rather than semantic
reasoning. The evaluation conducted in this work attempts to assess whether multimodal
LLMs can directly perform ICAO compliance. The findings show that LLMs can reliably
detect some categories of defects but consistently struggle with certain geometric de­
fects and capture related ones. This suggests that multimodal LLMs may serve best
as complementary components in FIQA systems, contributing semantic reasoning and
natural­language explanations, while traditional methods provide precise quality assess­
ment. An additional contribution of this work is the evaluation of seventeen multimodal
LLMs on ICAO compliance and defect detection. The results highlight clear differences
in performance across model sizes and architectures.
6.5
Addressing the Research Questions
This section serves as a reflection on the proposed research questions.
RQ1: How can face image quality assessment outputs be optimized to
improve usability and interpretability for non­expert users and system
operators?
Findings show that usability and interpretability can be improved by supplementing tra­
ditional FIQA with an LLM­based component. While FIQA scores are precise, they are
difficult to interpret. LLMs provide a built­in interpretability tool through natural­language
feedback. This makes them particularly valuable for non­expert users, who may benefit
from non­technical descriptions that can be tailored to their level of understanding. The
experiments also show that the clarity and usability of these explanations strongly depend
on prompt design.
RQ2: To what extent can LLMs generate accurate, actionable, and
standards­compliant feedback complementing facial image quality
vectors?
The results show that LLMs can achieve very high accuracy for several defect cate­
gories, demonstrating strong potential as a tool for FIQA. While performance remains
lower for some categories, it is still notable that these models achieve such results purely
through in­context learning, with no task­specific training. This variability suggests that,
although general­purpose LLMs are not yet fully reliable as standalone FIQA solutions
in every scenario, they already provide a strong foundation. With ongoing progress in
multimodal LLMs—or with targeted fine­tuning for FIQA tasks—these models are well
positioned to achieve consistently dependable performance in the near future.
6.6
Summary
The findings of this study align well within existing research. While these models show
promise for defect detection and for generating human­readable justifications, they show
considerable limitations. Overall, multimodal LLMs appear well suited as supplementary
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 31
==PAGE:38==
components in FIQA workflows, but not as standalone evaluators under current capabili­
ties.
6.7
Limitations
The use of synthetic datasets could limit the real­world generalizability of the results.
While these datasets are well controlled, they cannot fully capture the natural variability of
image capture. Additionally, all non­compliant images contain exactly one isolated defect,
whereas real­world images could contain multiple issues. This means that the evaluated
models are tested under simplified conditions that may overestimate their performance.
A further limitation concerns demographics.
Although the synthetic identities cover a
range of facial types, they do not reflect real demographic distributions. Since demo­
graphic bias is a known challenge in face recognition [45], this study cannot determine
whether model performance varies across groups such as race, age, or gender.
6.8
Future Work
Future research could extend this study in several directions. First, the use of real
image datasets made for face recognition could improve the validity of the results. Such
datasets should include images where multiple defects may occur within the same image.
Evaluating models under these conditions would provide a more accurate assessment.
Second, future work should investigate demographic bias. Purposefully balanced datasets
representing diverse racial, age, and gender groups would make it possible to analyze
whether LLMs perform differently across these groups. Understanding these variations is
important given the well­documented fairness challenges in face recognition.
Third, as LLM technology advances rapidly, ongoing evaluation of newer models is needed.
Incorporating better vision–language models may reveal architectures that handle FIQA
more reliably.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the practicality of such systems could be examined.
One direction is to integrate the proposed pipeline into a real­world biometric workflow and
conduct surveys with domain experts. This would help determine whether LLM­based
assistance improves efficiency or decision­making accuracy and to what extent it is trusted
by practitioners.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 32
==PAGE:39==
7
Conclusion
Author’s final remarks
This study presents an implementation of large language models to improve the explain­
ability of face image quality assessment algorithms. Multiple models and prompt designs
were tested to assess strengths and limitations in visual reasoning tasks. Results high­
light the influence of prompt engineering and model scale on output quality and show
that LLMs can effectively support human evaluators, despite limitations for certain defect
types. Overall, LLMs were shown to be a useful tool for ICAO compliance assessment,
and practical lessons were gained in experimentation, evaluation, and interpretation of
results. As LLMs advance, improved prompts and larger datasets will further boost the
transparency and interpretability of automated FIQA.
Working on this project was both challenging and rewarding. It felt meaningful to con­
tribute to an area with practical relevance, even if at a small scale. At the same time, it
became clear that truly operationalizing this method would require a lot more work and
refinement. Even though I was supervised and received lots of guidance throughout this
thesis work, I had great freedom on the design of the experiment, which I truly value.
From a personal perspective, the experience was fulfilling, providing me with a glimpse
into academia, and I am grateful that I had this opportunity. Completing this project marks
the end of my time as a student, giving a sense of closure to this chapter of life.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 33
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Anil K. Jain, Karthik Nandakumar, and Arun Ross. “50 years of biometric research:
Accomplishments, challenges, and opportunities”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters
79 (2016), pp. 80–105. DOI: 10.1016/j.patrec.2015.12.013.
[2]
M. Trauring. “Automatic Comparison of Finger­Ridge Patterns”. In: Nature 197 (1963),
pp. 938–940. DOI: 10.1038/197938a0.
[3]
D. Petrétei. “Fingerprints in ancient China ­ A mini­review”. In: Forensic Science
Review 37.1 (Jan. 2025), pp. 45–50.
[4]
R. M. Caplan. “How fingerprints came into use for personal identification”. In: Journal
of the American Academy of Dermatology 23.1 (1990), pp. 109–114. DOI: 10.1016/
0190-9622(90)70194-M.
[5]
Francis Galton. Fingerprints. London: Macmillan & Co., 1892.
[6]
John Langenderfer and Steven Linnhoff. “The emergence of biometrics and its effect
on consumers”. In: Journal of Consumer Affairs 39.2 (2005), pp. 314–338. DOI:
10.1111/j.1745-6606.2005.00017.x.
[7]
K. B. Raja et al. “Smartphone based visible iris recognition using deep sparse filter­
ing”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 57 (2015), pp. 33–42. DOI: 10.1016/j.patrec.
2014.09.006.
[8]
I. Adjabi et al. “Past, Present, and Future of Face Recognition: A Review”. In: Elec­
tronics 9.8 (2020), p. 1188. DOI: 10.3390/electronics9081188.
[9]
Ansh Agrawal, Kirandeep Kaur, and Harkeerat Kaur. “Explainable AI in Biometrics:
A Novel Framework for Facial Recognition Interpretation”. In: 2024 International
Conference on Modeling, Simulation & Intelligent Computing (MoSICom). 2024,
pp. 524–529. DOI: 10.1109/MoSICom63082.2024.10881703.
[10]
Cesare Tucci, Alessandro Della Greca, Gennaro Tortora, et al. “Explainable biomet­
rics: a systematic literature review”. In: Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Human­
ized Computing (2024). DOI: 10.1007/s12652-024-04856-1.
[11]
Torsten Schlett et al. “Face Image Quality Assessment: A Literature Survey”. In:
ACM Computing Surveys (2022). DOI: 10.1145/3507901.
[12]
Philipp Terhorst et al. “SER­FIQ: Unsupervised Estimation of Face Image Quality
Based on Stochastic Embedding Robustness”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2020, pp. 5651–
5660. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00569.
[13]
Javier Hernandez­Ortega et al. “FaceQnet: Quality Assessment for Face Recog­
nition based on Deep Learning”. In: 2019 International Conference on Biometrics
(ICB). 2019, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/ICB45273.2019.8987255.
[14]
Qiang Meng et al. “MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2021, pp. 14225–14234.
[15]
Fadi Boutros et al. “CR­FIQA: Face Image Quality Assessment by Learning Sample
Relative Classifiability”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2023, pp. 5836–5845.
[16]
Fu­Zhao Ou et al. “SDD­FIQA: Unsupervised Face Image Quality Assessment With
Similarity Distribution Distance”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2021, pp. 7670–7679.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 34
==PAGE:41==
[17]
K. R. Chowdhary. “Natural Language Processing”. In: Fundamentals of Artificial
Intelligence. New Delhi: Springer India, 2020, pp. 603–649. ISBN: 978­81­322­3972­
7. DOI: 10.1007/978-81-322-3972-7_19.
[18]
Winston P. Henry and Patrick Henry Winston. Artificial Intelligence. USA: Addison
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2004. ISBN: 0201855046.
[19]
Wayne Xin Zhao et al. “A survey of large language models”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.18223 1.2 (2023).
[20]
J. T. Gonzales. “Implications of AI Innovation on Economic Growth: A Panel Data
Study”. In: Journal of Economic Structures 12.1 (2023), p. 13. DOI: 10.1186/s40008-
023-00307-w.
[21]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Vol. 30. 2017.
[22]
Alec Radford et al. “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners”. In: Ope­
nAI blog 1.8 (2019), p. 9.
[23]
Emily M. Bender et al. “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Mod­
els Be Too Big?” In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac­
countability, and Transparency. ACM, 2021, pp. 610–623.
[24]
Ben Mann et al. “Language models are few­shot learners”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165
1.3 (2020), p. 3.
[25]
Yoshua Bengio et al. “A neural probabilistic language model”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3 (2003), pp. 1137–1155.
[26]
Long Ouyang et al. “Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155 (2022).
[27]
Paul Christiano et al. “Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017, pp. 4302–4310.
[28]
Jared Kaplan et al. “Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361 (2020).
[29]
Jason Wei et al. “Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.07682 (2022).
[30]
Shukang Yin et al. “A survey on multimodal large language models”. In: National
Science Review 11.12 (Nov. 2024), nwae403. ISSN: 2095­5138. DOI: 10.1093/nsr/
nwae403.
[31]
Q. Dong et al. A Survey on In­context Learning. 2024. arXiv: 2301.00234 [cs.CL].
[32]
Ivan Deandres­Tame et al. “How good is ChatGPT at face biometrics? A first look
into recognition, soft biometrics, and explainability”. In: IEEE Access 12 (2024),
pp. 34390–34401.
[33]
Kartik Narayan, VS Vibashan, and Vishal M. Patel. “FaceXBench: Evaluating Multi­
modal LLMs on Face Understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10360 (2025).
[34]
Chengzhi Liu et al. “More Thinking, Less Seeing? Assessing Amplified Hallucination
in Multimodal Reasoning Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.XXXX (2025).
[35]
Domonkos Varga. “Comparative Evaluation of Multimodal Large Language Models
for No­Reference Image Quality Assessment with Authentic Distortions”. In: Big
Data Cogn. Comput. 9.5 (2025), p. 132. DOI: 10.3390/bdcc9050132.
[36]
Yifan Li et al. “Evaluating Object Hallucination in Large Vision­Language Models”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10355. 2023.
[37]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning transferable visual models from natural language su­
pervision”. In: International conference on machine learning. PmLR. 2021, pp. 8748–
8763.
[38]
Qiong Wu et al. “Grounded chain­of­thought for multimodal large language models”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12799 (2025).
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 35
==PAGE:42==
[39]
Chenglei Wu et al. “Breaking Down CLIP: How Vision­Language Models Process
Images”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08752 (2024).
[40]
Georgios Pantazopoulos and Eda B Özyiğit. “Towards Understanding Visual Ground­
ing in Visual Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10345 (2025).
[41]
Shengbang Tong et al. “Eyes wide shut? exploring the visual shortcomings of multi­
modal llms”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2024, pp. 9568–9578.
[42]
Toyin Aguda et al. “Conservative Bias in Large Language Models: Measuring Re­
lation Predictions”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025, pp. 18989–18998. DOI:
10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.973.
[43]
Cheng­Kuang Wu et al. “Answer, Refuse, or Guess? Investigating Risk­Aware De­
cision Making in Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01332 (2025).
[44]
Shumiao Ouyang, Hayong Yun, and Xingjian Zheng. “How Ethical Should AI Be?
How AI Alignment Shapes the Risk Preferences of LLMs”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01168
(2024).
[45]
Ketan Kotwal and Sebastien Marcel. “Review of demographic bias in face recogni­
tion”. In: arXiv e­prints (2025), arXiv–2502.
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 36
==PAGE:43==
A
Appendix
Implementation of In­Context Learning for Facial Image Quality Assessment Evaluation and Compliance 37
==PAGE:44==
You are an ICAO compliance evaluator. 
Given the following facial image, determine whether it is compliant with ICAO standards and  
identify the single most relevant reason for non-compliance from the list below. 
Be concise and use the listed terms exactly when appropriate.  
Possible reasons for non-compliance: 
 
pose – 
The head or shoulders are not in a proper frontal position. 
This includes any rotation or tilt beyond acceptable limits of the head— yaw ≤ 5° (turned left or 
right), pitch ≤ 5° (tilted up or down), or roll ≤ 8°(side tilt). 
The subject should be centered, upright, and facing directly toward the camera, with face and 
shoulders. 
 
gaze – 
The eyes are not looking straight at the camera. 
This includes sideways, downward, or upward gaze, or when the person’s eyes are not aligned 
with the camera lens. 
Both pupils should be visible and directed forward. 
 
smile – 
The person shows visible teeth, smiles, or has a non-neutral facial expression (such as 
frowning, raising eyebrows, or exaggerated mouth movements). 
ICAO requires a neutral expression with a closed mouth. 
 
eyes_closed – 
One or both eyes are closed, partially closed, blinking, or obscured (for example, by hair or 
shadows). 
Both eyes must be fully open and clearly visible. 
 
head_covering – 
The person wears a cap, hat, hood, veil, or other headwear that obscures parts of the face or 
head. 
Only religious or medical head coverings are permitted, and they must not cast shadows on the 
face or obscure facial features. 
 
makeup – 
The person wears heavy makeup, face paint, or cosmetic alterations that significantly change 
their natural appearance. 
The face should appear natural, without exaggerated coloration or contouring. 
 
sunglasses – 
The person wears dark, mirrored, or tinted glasses that block visibility of the eyes. 
Glasses are only acceptable if the eyes are clearly visible and there is no reflection or glare on 
the lenses. 
==PAGE:45==
 
background – 
The background is not plain, uniform, or light-colored. 
This includes visible patterns, textures, objects, or clutter that distract from the face. 
ICAO requires a smooth, neutral, and evenly lit background. 
 
light – 
Lighting is uneven or poorly balanced. 
This includes shadows across the face, glare, hotspots, or under/overexposure. 
Skin tone should appear natural with even illumination and no strong directional light. 
 
exposure – 
The image is overexposed or underexposed. 
Details in the face or background may be lost due to extreme brightness or darkness. 
 
focus – 
The image is out of focus or blurry. 
Facial features are not sharp or clearly defined. 
 
resolution – 
The image has too low a resolution or is heavily pixelated. 
Details necessary for facial recognition are missing. 
 
saturation – 
Colors in the image are unnaturally saturated or distorted. 
Skin tone and other features may appear unrealistic. 
 
posterization – 
The image has visible banding, color steps, or compression artifacts. 
This reduces the natural appearance of the face. 
 
zoom – 
The head occupies too much or too little of the frame, or parts of it (such as the chin or top of 
the head) are cropped out. 
ICAO recommends the head height to cover about 60–90% of the image height, and the face 
should be fully visible within the frame. 
 
The image is attached here. I want the answer to look in a certain way: 
First line: COMPLIANT or NON COMPLIANT. 
Second line: a score from 1-100 on how prominent the identified defect is in the image. Images 
with obvious defects should have a high score, compliant images should have a low score. 
Third line: the name of the defect (only if NON COMPLIANT, select the most prominent issue). 
Forth line: reasoning behind the decision. 
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
DK, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
