==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Impact analysis of problem 
characteristics, modeling parameters 
and algorithms in wind farm layout 
optimization
Author:
5uLIu /Lao
DTU Wind-M-1006
'HFHPEHr 202
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-
'HFHPEHr 202
E&T6 
EduFation Master of 6FienFe
SXSerYLsRrs
Ju )HnJ
'78 :ind 	 (nergy 6ystems
5emarNs
TKis reSort is suEmitted as Sartial 
fulfillment of tKe reTuirements for 
graduation in tKe aEoYe eduFation at 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN
7echnical 8niYersity of 
'enmarN DeSartment of Wind and 
Energy 6ystems )rederiNsEorgYeM 
 000 5osNilde
'enmarN
ZZZZLnddtXdN
$uthor 
5uLIu /LaR
7itle
,PSaFW anaOyVLV RI SrREOHP FKaraFWHrLVWLFV 
PRGHOLnJ SaraPHWHrV anG aOJRrLWKPV Ln ZLnG 
IarP OayRuW RSWLPL]aWLRn
DTU Wind 	 Energy 6ystems is a deSartment of 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN ZitK a uniTue 
integration of researFK eduFation innoYation and 
SuEliFSriYate seFtor Fonsulting in tKe field of Zind 
energy 2ur aFtiYities deYeloS neZ oSSortunities 
and teFKnology for tKe gloEal and DanisK 
e[Sloitation of Zind energy 5esearFK foFuses on 
Ney teFKniFal-sFientifiF fields ZKiFK are Fentral for 
tKe deYeloSment innoYation and use of Zind 
energy and SroYides tKe Easis for adYanFed 
eduFation at tKe eduFation
3ublicity 
7he reSort LV public.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Wind Farm Layout Optimization (WFLO) is a complex, non-linear problem whose out-
comes depend on the problem formulation and optimization methodology. This thesis
pursues two complementary objectives, implemented with a unified framework enabled
by the TopDesign platform in TOPFARM. First, a comprehensive Design of Experiments
(DOE) study evaluates nine factors at various levels, in which significant factors are sup-
plemented by case studies. These nine factors include problem characteristics (wind rose
type, weibull A scale parameter, number of turbines, minimum turbine spacing and farm
shape), optimizing parameters (wake model, thrust coeﬀicient and number of wind sec-
tors) and algorithmic choice. Results show that wind resource (wind-rose representation
and Weibull A scale parameter) are the two most significant drivers in optimization poten-
tial. For wind rose types, it is found that the weighted concentration of the wind peaks
have a strong positive correlation with AEP improvement. Moreover, all optimization
parameters are found to be statistically non-significant, indicating that coarser models
provide correct optimization direction as long as benchmarking is done at start and end
of the optimization process. Second, seven optimization algorithms, Random Search (RS),
Local Search (LS), Ant Bee Colony (ABC), Moth-Flame Optimization (MFO), Covariance
Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMAES), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
and Real Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA), are systematically compared across both
DOE study and five realistic offshore wind farms. RS consistently yields the highest or
near-highest AEP improvements, with LS and ABC also exhibiting strong performance
due to their effective balance between exploration and local exploitation, allowing them
to reliably improve layouts across complex search landscapes. In contrast, population-
based metaheuristics (CMAES, PSO, MFO, RCGA) show weaker and often inconsistent
improvements. Statistical tests confirmed the differences between algorithms exist to a
certain extent. As such, it is concluded that WFLO is a problem driven by wind resource
problem characteristics, aided by algorithmic choice.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude towards Senior Researcher Ju Feng for his guidance
in the project, providing constructive comments and encouraging discussions that took
the thesis to a much more sophisticated level.
I also want to extend my thanks to my dear partner Peng and my family for their infinite
support and encouragement throughout my study. It was a treacherous journey to get
here, combating both mental and physical health. I would not have made it without their
accompaniment.
Use of AI
According to DTU regulations, use of AI is permitted in thesis projects and must be
specified how it is used. OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Visual Studio Code’s Copilot were the
two tools used during the thesis period. It primarily helped to:
• Conceptualize, aid or summarize in the understanding of diﬀicult and complex top-
ics. A prompt of this type can be: “Explain this step of algorithm X, I don’t quite
understand it.”
• Correct grammatical errors and refine language used in the thesis writing. A prompt
of this type can be: “I finished this passage, please review if there any grammatical
errors or mistakes.”
• Increase eﬀiciency in code development by identifying bugs and compiling similar
scripts.
A prompt of this type can be: “This code is still not working, why it
prompts this error and how can I fix it.”
• Widen the search scope of certain topics when ordinary online research does not
provide satisfactory results.
A prompt of this type can be: “I can’t find much
information on topic Y, could you help me find some literature on this topic.”
It is important to note that all scientific analysis, critical reasoning, and final conclusions
presented in this thesis are conducted and validated by the author.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Literature Review
3
2.1
WFLO development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Past Comparative Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Random Search (RS) and Local Search (LS) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Population-based algorithms (MFO, CMAES, ABC, RCGA, PSO)
9
2.4
Wind Farm Wake Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Design of Experiments (DOE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
The optimization problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Impact Factor Descriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Assumptions and simplifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Implementation in TopDesign and TOPFARM . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Algorithm and wake model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
DOE Impact Analysis plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Impact Analysis
31
4.1
Computational Performance Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Effects Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Key Influencing Factors trend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Evolution History and Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Mann-Whitney U Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Case Studies
42
5.1
Overview of case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.1
Von mises distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Case Study 2: Area and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Fixed area vs. Fixed density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.1
Wind Farms Chosen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:6==
5.4.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
General Discussion
56
6.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Problem Characteristics and Optimizing Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Interpretation of Algorithm Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Limitations of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion and Future Recommendation
63
References
I
Appendix
VI
7.1
DOE Test Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
7.2
Effects Test (using Max AEP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
7.3
Realistic Wind Farm Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
ABC Artificial Bee Colony
AEP
Annual Energy Production
ANOVA ANalysis Of VAriance
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics
CMAES Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy
DOE Design Of Experiments
EWM Engineering Wake Model
LCOE Levelized Cost of Energy
LES
Large Eddy Simulation
LS
Local Search
MFO Moth Flame Optimization
NPV Net Present Value
PSO
Particle Swarm Optimization
RANS Reynolds Average Navier Stokes
RCGA Real Coded Genetic Algorithm
RS
Random Search
SCADA Supervisory control and data acquisition
SNOPT Sparse Nonlinear OPTimizer
WEC Wake Expansion Continuation
WFLO Wind Farm Layout Optimization
WT
Wind Turbine
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Among the fast paced goal towards the green transition, global demand for renewable
energy is accelerating as nations seek to reduce dependency on fossil fuels. Rivaling fossil
fuels, Wind energy has become one of the most mature and cost-effective technologies. In
2024, the annual electricity generation from wind turbines globally has increased to ap-
proximately 2497.25 TWh [1]. In 2023’s global electricity mix, wind energy now accounts
for over 7.8 % of electricity generated [2], providing clean energy to billions of house-
holds and emphasizing the important role that wind energy plays in the global renewable
market.
With the soar in wind energy demand, wind farms are increasing in both scale and com-
plexity, where the spatial arrangement of turbines (known as the wind-farm layout), is a
key factor in predicting the overall energy yield and economic performance of a project.
The optimization of this arrangement, is therefore the core of this thesis, and will be
referred as Wind Farm Layout Optimization (WFLO). In WFLO, researchers aim to op-
timize a certain objective, whether it is the maximum Annual Energy Production (AEP)
or the minimum levelized cost of energy (LCOE) while satisfying numerous technical and
environmental constraints. As wind turbines cannot be “moved” after construction with-
out bearing a huge economic burden, a well optimized layout mitigates wake losses to the
minimum while ensuring the maximum possible energy capture. In turn, it also enhances
the lifetime performance of the farm.
WFLO is a complex, nonlinear and multidisciplinary problem involving, wind turbine
technology, aerodynamics, meteorology and algorithm computation. The aerodynamic
wake interactions between turbines causes a reduction in wind speeds, making the place-
ment of each turbine interdependent with the rest of the array. Boundary limitation and
wind resource modeling adds another layer of complexity towards the problem. Over
the past two decades, countless of optimization methods/algorithms have been proposed
to solve WFLO. Despite substantial progress, there remains no universal consensus on
which algorithm performs most optimally, where the problem formulation, wake model,
site specific wind characteristic all play a role in how the algorithm behaves.
There are currently limited comparative studies on WFLO, which often comes with the
objective of highlighting the algorithm that the author has produced. Additionally, many
of them have different wind resources, farm geometries, turbine characteristics, and wake
representations, making cross-comparison challenging. Consequently, it remains unclear
whether the observed variations in WFLO outcomes originate primarily from the algo-
rithm itself or from underlying problem feature and modeling parameters. Addressing
the ambiguity is needed to better understand the complexity in WFLO and guide both
Page 1 of 64
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
research and industrial practice toward more reproducible optimization results.
Thus, the overall objective of the thesis is to systematically investigate how problem
characteristics, modeling parameters and algorithmic choices affect the results of wind-
farm layout optimization. By analyzing the influence of each element, the study hopes
to provide a more rigorous understanding of what drives the performance differences in
WFLO. In particular, an attempt is made to address the following questions:
• What factors most significantly impact the results of various wind-farm layout op-
timization problems? What factors make optimization worthwhile?
• Given a specific problem formulation how much improvement can realistically be
expected from optimization?
• Are there statistically significant difference between the performance of various op-
timization problem?
To answer these questions, both idealized and realistic offshore wind-farm scenarios are
examined. An impact analysis is first employed through a Design of Experiments (DOE)
framework to evaluate the influence of various variables, including wind-rose type, num-
ber of wind sectors, Weibull scale parameter (mean wind speed), wake model, turbine
thrust coeﬀicient, wind farm minimum spacing, number of turbines, wind farm shape and
algorithm choice. The DOE enables the identification of main interaction effects while
minimizing the number of required simulations, which are computationally expensive.
Statistical analysis through Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is then used to quantify the
effects and relative significance of each factor.
After identifying key effects, an array of case studies are done to further investigate
how the effects interact with the optimization. The findings of this study are expected to
convey a clearer understanding of sensitivity and uncertainty in WFLO research. By iden-
tifying which parameters and model selections exert the largest influence on optimization
outcomes, the results can help to establish a more standardized benchmarking practice in
the field of WFLO and support developers and engineers in selecting appropriate models
and optimization methods for different wind-farm designs.
The remainder of this thesis follows with Chapter 2 which states the background and
literature review of the study, including algorithms, wake modeling and design of exper-
iments. Chapter 3 provides the methodology of the optimization problem and impact
analysis. Chapter 4 describes the impact analysis results. Chapter 5 presents the imple-
mentation, the results and discussion of the case studies. Chapter 6 finishes with some
general comparative discussions, including key findings, interpretations and limitations.
Finally, Chapter 7 concludes the thesis with some future research recommendations.
Page 2 of 64
==PAGE:10==
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
2
Background and Literature Review
In this section, the main focus is to cover the overarching topics. The section begins by
introducing the development of wind farm layout optimization, and then briefly details
some past comparative papers which helped to shape the study. Afterwards, the section
continues with more technical aspects of the study, including the algorithms and wake
model used, which are two key aspects of WFLO. Additionally, a section on design of
experiments (DOE) is included to explain how this concept helps with the impact analysis.
2.1
WFLO development
The concept of wind farm layout optimization emerged around two decades ago, with one
of the earlier papers written by Mosetti et al. [3]. In his study, he used a meta heuristic
genetic algorithm to optimize a wind farm layout with variable number of wind turbines
in a 10 by 10 grid under three wind cases: a single direction, a constant intensity with
variable direction, and variable intensity with variable direction. The objective function
of his paper is to minimize a weighted average between the inverse total power and the
total cost per power produced, which balances the relationship between power and cost
of a wind farm. This novel approach opened up the doors to optimization of large wind
farms.
A large number of studies have been then published on the topic in the next two decades.
In the most recent review created by Herbert et al. [4], the authors provided a com-
prehensive overview of methodological approaches up until 2013, including 150 studies
related to wind farm layout optimization. The work classified the approaches on various
dimensions, including the objective function used (i.e. max AEP, min LCOE, max NPV
etc.), the wake models used (i.e. Jensen, Larsen, Custom, CFD etc.) and the optimization
algorithm (i.e. metaheuristic, heuristic or calculus-based).
It has been found that among the wake models, the Jensen-Katic [5] (or more commonly
known as Jensen) formulations dominated due to their simplicity and low computational
cost, whereas more advanced models such as CFD-based approaches are rarely employed.
Due to the distant time of the study, popular models used today such as the Gaussian
model developed in Bastankhah et al. [6] is not yet well known. In terms of optimization
techniques, over two-thirds of studies opted for metaheuristics, given their flexibility and
ability to manage highly nonlinear, non-convex search spaces. Finally, there has been an
equal share of various objective functions used, with many incorporating economic factors
to make the optimization more realistic. With that said, due to the limited accessibility
of economics in the private sector, researchers are often left with simplified equations
and tend to not reflect the a real-life scenario. This limitation will also be touched upon
Page 3 of 64
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Past Comparative Studies
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
further into the thesis during the case study section.
Moving to the last decade of research, the field of WFLO has improved greatly on a ver-
tical scale, with “better” algorithms, more “accurate” wakes and “higher” improvements.
However, just like how the review emphasized a decade ago, the field still lacks of stan-
dardized benchmarks and unified evaluation frameworks, which complicates horizontal
cross-study comparison and makes it increasingly diﬀicult to justify the superiority of an
algorithm.
2.2
Past Comparative Studies
Despite the lack of standardized benchmarks, there has been several valuable comparative
studies in the field. I would therefore like to detail them briefly in chronological order and
point out their characteristics. It is important to note that there are many more studies
in the field, in which the comparison aspect are often done for the purpose of exhibiting
superiority of the author’s own model. The chosen studies are therefore considered from
my perspective to be the most unbiased and relevant.
Baker et al. (2019)
One of the earlier large-scale benchmarking initiatives was conducted by Baker et al. [7]
under IEA Task 37, in which they organized two standardized case studies to investigate
how optimization algorithms and wake model selection interact with WFLO. In the first
case study, the wake model has been fixed while participants were allowed to choose
different algorithms to optimize wind farms of size 16, 36 and 64 wind turbines. In the
second case study, participants submitted results for a 9 turbine problem with various
algorithm, but then cross-evaluated the optimized layout with various wake models.
Results showed that gradient-based methods, especially the Sparse Nonlinear OPTimizeer
combined with Wake Expansion Continuation (SNOPT+WEC), consistently achieved the
highest AEP across problem sizes. The introduction of the wake expansion continuation
(WEC) smoothing technique is thought to be a key helper in escaping local optima,
which is a challenge for gradient-based algorithms.
It is also important to note that
SNOPT is a non open source program and a license is required to be used.
In the
cross comparison case study, the wake models presented a difference of upwards of 7%,
revealing sensitivity of optimization outcomes. Given that the author only retains the
results from the participant (i.e. each participant code base varied), limited conclusions
can be made apart from gradient-based methods deem to be superior than general well
known gradient-free methods.
Brogna et al. (2020)
Page 4 of 64
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Past Comparative Studies
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
Albeit the core of Brogna et al. [8] is the development of a new terrain-aware wake model,
it features a comparison of algorithms in the latter half of the study. By applying the new
wake model to a 25-turbine wind farm in complex terrain, eight optimization algorithms
(two gradient-based, six gradient-free) were tested. A two-stage optimization stride is also
tested, where the optimization first ignores wake effects, and adds it back in the second
round of optimization.
The results of the comparative analysis showed that gradient-free randomized and local-
search heuristics produced layouts with the most promising results, which sounds con-
tradictory to already well-established and elaborate global optimizers. In the two stage
approach, only marginal improvements are seen and is subject to precise parameter tun-
ing.
This paper is one of the few that combines both complex-terrain effects with a
comparison in algorithmic choice. As a result, the author suggests that in certain cases,
stochastic diversity outweighs the benefits of formal gradient-based methods.
Kunakote et al. (2022)
Kunakote et al. [9] replicated Mosetti’s work across twelve metaheuristic algorithms under
four wind farm cases, in which it tests fixed and variable number of turbines, both with and
without partial wake overlap. As such, it makes this study one of the most comprehensive
comparisons in the field of metaheuristics. Simplicity was a main focus on other aspects
such as constant wind speed and constant thrust coeﬀicient, with an objective function
of maximizing cost per total power. The wind farms are set-up in a 10 by 10 cell grid,
allowing limited movement space. The authors then applied a non-parametric Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests to assess statistical differences in performance.z
Results indicated that Moth-Flame Optimization (MFO), Covariance Matrix Adaptation
Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) and Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) performed the best sta-
tistically. However, performance rankings did change across cases, reinforcing the “No
Free Lunch” theorem suggested by Wolpert and Macready [10] for optimization, where
no optimization algorithm is superior for all optimization problems. Additionally, the
simplicity of the grid cell set-up and wind resource makes the study more vulnerable to a
realistic scenario.
Thomas et al. (2023)
Continuing from the earlier IEA Task 37 initiative, Thomas et al. [11] organized a head-to-
head comparison of eight optimization methods on IEA Task 37 Case 4, which is based on
the Borssele III/IV offshore wind farm. The layout of this case is inherently challenging,
with a large number of 81 turbines, and disconnected boundaries. Similar to Baker et
al.[7]], participants were responsible to conduct their own developed algorithm and runs,
which the author believes it ensures expert-level tuning on the same WFLO problem.
Page 5 of 64
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
A variety of methods, covering both gradient-based and gradient-free methods were tested,
with results achieving similar final AEP improvements in the range of 1.9 % to 2.2 %
over the baseline. The common trend among all layouts is that turbines are pushed to
the boundaries, leaving turbines inside the boundaries sparsely distributed. The authors
believe that algorithm variation largely diminishes when tuning are done by the algorithm
developer. Although only one case study is analyzed, this study challenges the notion
of “best algorithm”, and instead emphasizes the importance of reproducible results in
WFLO.
2.3
Algorithms
Given a wind farm layout optimization problem, the algorithm acts as the black box,
where it takes in all the inputs, and pushes out the objective output. Therefore, the
algorithm is the essential core to the success of solving a WFLO problem. Considering
the past comparative studies, personal experience and ability to adapt to the framework
(see further in Section subsection 3.2), seven gradient-free algorithms have been chosen
to be systematically tested. Gradient-based algorithms are not chosen due to their lim-
ited flexibility with the evaluation framework used in this study. As an example, these
methods require smooth and fully differentiable objective functions, which are often not
satisfied in certain wake models. Implementing gradient-based algorithms also require
additional formulation, which lies beyond the time frame of the study. Under the realm
of gradient-free algorithms, this study uses two single-solution based algorithms, Random
Search (RS) and Local Search (LS), and five population based algorithms, Moth-Flame
Optimization (MFO), Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMAES), Ar-
tificial Bee Colony (ABC), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Real Coded Genetic
Algorithm (RCGA). Besides PSO and RCGA, which act as common mainstream algo-
rithms, all other algorithms are chosen due to their “superior” performance in previous
comparative studies. In the following subsections, a schematic diagram is provided for
each step-based algorithm and a generic one is provided for population-based algorithm to
facilitate understanding. For actual implementation, it is advised to reference the original
algorithm paper for detailed procedure.
2.3.1
Random Search (RS) and Local Search (LS)
Starting with the Random Search (RS) algorithm, as described by Feng and Shen [12], is a
simple single-solution based stochastic algorithm that explores the design space iteratively
with a fixed number of turbines layout. In each iteration, the algorithm randomly perturbs
the position of one turbine at a time in a random direction with random step size, and
evaluates the feasibility of the resulting layout. A minor modification has been made
Page 6 of 64
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
compared to the original implementation —the heuristic of repeatedly moving the same
turbine when a better layout is found has been removed. As such, the RS algorithm used
here is fully stochastic in nature. The basic layout, slightly modified from Algorithm 1 in
Feng and Shen [12] can be seen in Figure 2.1.
START
END
Initial Layout, evaluate fitness, 
set stop condition to false
Is stop condition?
False
Move a random WT in random
direction and random step size
Is new layout
feasible?
False
Evaluate fitness of
new layout
Is new 
layout better?
Keep the old layout
Replace old layout with new
layout
True
False
True
True
num_tries <
max_tries
True
False
Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram for Random Search (RS) used in WFLO. WT is an
abbreviation for Wind Turbine
Subsequently, local search, described by Wagner et al. [13], is similar to random search,
but takes a more refined route through using nearest neighbor and adaptive measures. The
wind turbine is still randomly selected, but the local perturbation is decided by pushing
the wind turbine away from a number of neighboring wind turbines. The randomness is
then introduced with controlled normal distribution sampling of distance and direction.
Finally, an adaptive measure of the reversal in direction probability is considered. When
the layout is better than the previous, the standard deviation of the distance distribution
Page 7 of 64
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
is increased to allow for better exploration. If the opposite happens, then the standard
deviation decreases for better exploitation. This strategy offers an increase in the potential
of escape of local optima. A schematic diagram, modified from Algorithm 2 in Wagner et
al. [13] can be seen in Figure 2.2.
START
END
Initial Layout, evaluate fitness, 
set stop condition to false, set nn and p, 
set σdis and σdir
Is stop condition?
False
Is new layout
feasible?
False
Evaluate fitness of
new layout
Is new 
layout better?
Keep the old layout,
decrease σdis 
Replace old layout with new
layout, increase σdis
True
False
True
True
Randomly pick a WT, calculate
normalized displacement vector v
depending on sum of nn nearest
neighbor distance difference
Use N(0,σdis) and N(∠v,σdir ), to
decide distance and direction
Apply vector v = -v with reversal
direction probability p and move WT
Reduce v until legal
length
Figure 2.2: Schematic diagram for Local Search (LS) used in WFLO. WT is an abbre-
viation of Wind Turbine
Page 8 of 64
==PAGE:16==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
2.3.2
Population-based algorithms (MFO, CMAES, ABC, RCGA, PSO)
Compared to the single-solution based algorithms specifically developed for WFLO, population-
based algorithms are much more general and can be applied for a variety of optimization
problems. Their structure can be generalized in Figure 2.3.
START
END
Initialization of parameters 
and initial evaluation of population
Is stop condition?
Apply Update
Population Operator
Re-evaluate
population
Find global best
solution
False
True
Find optimal 
solutions and update
Figure 2.3: Schematic diagram for population-based algorithm used in WFLO.
Population-based algorithms always start with a set of N random layout solutions for n
turbines in vector of form [x1, x2, ..., xn, y1, y2, ..., yn], creating an initial population. Each
candidate layout is known as an individual food source/moth/particle depending on the
algorithm. In many cases, the original layout is also fed in as an individual. Depending on
the algorithm, there are certain parameters which tune the algorithm’s exploitation and
exploration capabilities. After evaluating the initial population, the algorithm starts to
“evolve” depending on their specific operators. A condensed description of each algorithm
is now presented.
Moth Flame Optimization (MFO)
Moth-Flame optimization (MFO) algorithm in this study is adopted from the original
developer Mirjalili [14]. This population-based metaheuristic is inspired by the transverse
orientation of moths in nature. In other words, moths (i.e. layouts in WFLO) when
exposed to an artificial light source (i.e. flame), fly in a spiral trajectory around the light
source. The flame here represents a guiding position, indicating a good layout found so
far. The goal for the moths is then to converge towards the flame that yield a higher
fitness. The simplified procedure follows:
1. Fitness of each moth is ranked, and assigned a flame number. At the start the of the
algorithm, the number of flames corresponds to the number of moths N (number
of layouts), meaning each moth has a guiding layout. As the number of generation
Page 9 of 64
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
t increases to Tmax, the number of flame Nf decreases with the following equation:
Nf = max
(
1, round
(
N −t(N −1)
Tmax
))
(2.1)
where the minimum is one flame, meaning the best solution acts as the guiding
solution towards the end of the algorithm, encouraging exploitation. When there is
less flames than the number of moths, the remaining unassigned moths are assigned
to the best flame.
2. For each moth layout Mi, the position is updated according to the logarithmic spiral
function:
Mt+1
i
= Ft
j + ebl cos(2πl)(|Ft
j −Mt
i|)
(2.2)
where Fj is the flame, b is a user defined parameter that defines the shape of the
spiral, l is a uniformly distributed random number between [-1,1] that determines
how far the moth is from the flame, and |Ft
j −Mt
i| is the distance between the moth
and the flame.
3. The updated moth layout is re-evaluated, and the better layout is taken to the next
generation.
Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMAES)
The Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMAES) algorithm version em-
ployed in this study is published by Hansen et al. [15] (Note the original algorithm is
implemented with more details in Hansen et al. [16], not the reduced time complexity
version). The algorithm is a population-based stochastic optimization that is different
than many swarm based algorithms which rely on explicit velocity or direction updates.
Instead, it focuses on the shape and orientation of the sampling distribution itself. As
such, the algorithm starts by initializing a spherical multivariate Gaussian distribution
with mean µ at the original layout geometric center. Due to the math-heavy complexity
of the algorithm, a rather simplified procedure is described here with the most important
steps that follow initialization:
1. Each layout xi that forms the population is sampled/created from the multivariate
Gaussian distribution, given roughly by the equation:
xi = µ + σN(0, C)
(2.3)
where µ represent the mean vector, σ is the global step size, N(0, C) is the multi-
variate normal distribution with zero mean and co-variance matrix C.
Page 10 of 64
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
2. The sampled population is then evaluated, and the top 50% percentile of layouts are
selected for recombination. The mean vector is updated using a weighted average of
the selected layouts’ turbine coordinates, where each layout contributes according to
logarithmically decreasing weights based on fitness rank. This ensures that better-
performing layouts have greater influence on determining the center of the next
generation’s search distribution
3. Two evolution paths pσ and pc are updated, which act as direction to progress for
updating the global step size σ and co-variance matrix C
4. An update is made on the eigendecomposition variables. The eigendecomposition
approach is to facilitate the eﬀicient sampling from the multivariate normal distri-
bution that utilizes the co-variance matrix N(0, C).
5. Finally, the next generation of sampling distribution is “fitted”, and the cycle then
repeats from step 1, mimicking an evolution process.
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC)
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm, introduced by Karaboga and Basturk [17], is
a swarm based metaheuristic algorithm inspired by the foraging behavior of honeybee
colonies. The collective actions of three types of bees, employed bees, onlooker bees and
scout bees, work to achieve exploration and exploitation for an optimal solution. In the
algorithm, each candidate layout of turbines is known as a food source, and the nectar
amount corresponds to the fitness values. The amount of employed bees and onlooker
bees is equal to the number of food source in the population. The initial population
is evaluated, the best food source/layout is recorded, and the simplified procedure then
follows:
1. Employed bee phase: Each employed bee explores a new layout vi by modifying
one random dimension j of the layout xi (i.e. one coordinate value either in y or x).
A randomly selected layout xk, where layout k and i are not the same, is used to
indicate the length of the move. The equation to modify the layout vi for a random
j dimension is given as:
vi,j = xi,j + ϕi,j(xi,j −xk,j)
(2.4)
where ϕi,j is a random perturbation number in the range of [−1; 1], dictating the
step size. The new layout is evaluated, and the employed bee will accept the better
food source.
2. Onlooker bee phase: After all employed bees finish their search, they share infor-
mation about their food source, essentially an updated population with better food
Page 11 of 64
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
sources. The job of each onlooker bees is then to selectively choose the better food
sources and apply the same step as the employed bee phase given in Equation 2.4.
The probability function for which food source the onlooker bee exploit is given by:
pi = fitnessi
∑fitness
(2.5)
where the core idea is based on a probability proportional to its nectar amounts
(fitness). The higher the fitness, the higher the probability the food source will be
explored. Between the new and old, the onlooker bee will chose the better food
source (layout).
3. Scout bee phase: The scout bee phase only occurs if a food source cannot be
improved after a certain number of trials (user defined parameter). In other words,
if the layout cannot be improved by the employed bee or the onlooker bee after
a certain amount of times. If this scenario happens, the food source (layout) is
discarded and a completely new random layout is generated to re-introduce some
stochasticity in the algorithm.
4. After one evolution, the best food source is recorded and it proceeds to the next
generation.
Real Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA)
The real-coded genetic algorithm of Chuang et al. [18] is used in this study. This version
of genetic algorithm is tailored for constrained optimization in continuous domain, which
is suitable for WFLO. In RCGA, each candidate wind farm layout represents an individ-
ual, and mimics the evolutionary process of natural selection over generations through
selection, crossover, and mutation. The simplified procedure then follows:
1. A ranking-based selection mechanism is initiated that sorts the layouts ac-
cording to their fitness values. The population is then divided into two groups, the
better A group and the worse B group.
2. If the probability of crossover p (user defined parameter) is satisfied, a direction-
based crossover strategy is applied to generate new offspring by paring each layout
from group Ai to a layout from group Bi, with the equation:
A∗
i = Ai + sc,iDi
and
B∗
i = Bi + sc,iDi
(2.6)
where A∗
i and B∗
i are the offspring of the parent layouts Ai and Bi. The variable
Di = Ai −Bi represents the search direction which directs the offspring from the
worse layout Bi to the better layout Ai and sc,i dictates the step size calculated
Page 12 of 64
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Algorithms
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
from the relative difference of fitness between the parent layouts. Note that the
vector Di has a probability of 50 % to equal to a zero vector, meaning no cross-over
is implemented for that layout pair.
3. If on the other hand, the variable p is not satisfied (i.e. 1 −p occurs), a dynamic
random mutation is implemented which results in two offspring given with equa-
tion:
A∗
i = Ai + smΦ0(xmax −xmin)
and
B∗
i = Bi + smΦ0(xmax −xmin)
(2.7)
where xmax−xmin is the range between the upper and lower bounds of the wind farm
boundary, sm dictates the mutation step-size and Φ0 dictates a random perturbation
vector with values that ranges between [−ϕ0; +ϕ0] (user defined parameter).
4. The updated population with offspring are evaluated and elitist replacement is
then applied, meaning the fitter layout individuals survives to the next generation.
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
Particle Swarm Optimization, is a common and widely successful population based meta-
heuristic algorithm developed first by Kennedy and Eberhart [19], in an attempt to mimic
the collective behavior of social organisms such as bird flocks. The version of PSO this
study uses originates from Chowdhury et al. [20]. Each particle of the population is a
layout candidate, and they collectively explores the continuous search space by iteratively
updating the velocity (and position) based on its own experience and the experience of
the whole population. For each population update, the following happens:
1. For each particle layout xi, a velocity vector vi is iterated based on the the particle
best solution pi and global best solution g, given by the following update equation:
vt+1
i
= αvt
i + c1r1(pi −xt
i) + c2r2(g −xt
i)
(2.8)
where pi−xt
i and g−xt
i dictates the search direction from the particle current layout
to their personal best and global best layouts. There are user defined parameters
of α representing the inertia weight from the previous velocity and acceleration
coeﬀicients c1 and c2 that determine the relative attraction towards the personal
and global best respectively. Note the r1 and r2 are random uniformly distributed
numbers in the range of [0, 1] to provide a level of stochasticity, representing the
step-size taken.
2. The particle’s layout is then updated as:
xt+1
i
= xt
i + vt+1
i
(2.9)
Page 13 of 64
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Wind Farm Wake Modeling
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
3. The population is then re-evaluated and the personal best pi and global best solution
g are updated accordingly.
2.4
Wind Farm Wake Modeling
Apart from algorithms, the other crucial component to a wind farm layout optimization is
how the wind farm wake is modeled. The wake effect, caused by the extraction of kinetic
energy of the wind from upstream turbines, is the dominant source of reduced power
losses and increase in fatigue loads in wind farms. Overall power losses due to wakes can
reach up to 40%, and fatigue loads may rise by 80% depending on turbine spacing, terrain
complexity, and atmospheric stability [4]. Therefore, reducing wake effects in wind farm
layout is highly decisive to the success of a wind farm economically. Given that wake effects
derive from the field fluid dynamics, a computationally complex field.
Higher-fidelity
models such as Reynolds Average Navier Stokes (RANS) or Large Eddy Simulations (LES)
are required to completely explain the phenomena. The time scale of these computations
far exceed the allowable time needed for an eﬀicient optimization. Thus, researchers have
published numerous engineering wake models (EWMs) to balance the trade-off between
model fidelity and optimization tractability. Three distinct engineering wake models are
used in this study, the traditional Jensen wake model proposed by N. O. Jensen [5] ,
the common Bastankhah Gaussian based model proposed by Bastankhah and Porté-Agel
[6], and a newer TurbOPark model proposed by Pedersen et al. [21]. It is noted that the
former two wake models are widely used in WFLO studies, either appearing in the original
version or it forms the basis of more advanced EWMs. In this study, Python-based open
source wind farm simulation tool PyWake [22] developed at DTU (Technical University
of Denmark) is used to model the wake effects, and a basic description is now given for
each wake model.
Jensen Wake Model
The Jensen model, also known as the Park model in certain engineering practice software,
is introduced by N. O. Jensen in 1983 [5] and is one of the earliest engineering wake model
that is still widely applied in WFLO today. The theory of the wake model is based on
mass conservation, where wake expands linearly in a cone shape with a top-hat velocity
profile. The wake radius grows linearly as follows with downstream distance x:
r(x) = D
2 + kx
(2.10)
where D is the rotor diameter, and k is the entrainment coeﬀicient representing ambient
turbulence. The downstream velocity as a function of downstream distance is then:
Page 14 of 64
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Wind Farm Wake Modeling
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
U(x) = U∞
(
1 −1 −√1 −CT
(1 + 2kx/D)2
)
(2.11)
where U∞is the undisturbed wind velocity, CT is the thrust coeﬀicient, k is the entrain-
ment coeﬀicient and D is the rotor diameter. It is noted that the algebraic formulation
of the Jensen wake model comes from Katic et al. [23], which is why in some papers the
model is also known as Katic-Jensen wake model.
The model assumes that wake expands linearly with downstream distance x and neglects
any radial variation in velocity, which in turn lead to a uniform deficit within the wake.
Despite being widely used in the field due to its computation eﬀiciency, the Jensen wake
model often overestimates wake losses in the near wake and underestimates velocity re-
cover in turbulent conditions [4], [6].
Bastankhah Wake Model
Bastankhah and Porté-Agel improved the analytical wake framework by introducing a
Gaussian-shaped velocity-deficit distribution in 2014, which is derived from both mass
and momentum conservation. The normalized velocity deficit at distance x and radial
position r can be given by:
∆U(r, x)
U∞
= U∞−UW
U∞
=
(
1 −
√
1 −
CT
8(σ/D)2
)
e−r2
2σ2
(2.12)
where U∞is the freestream velocity, UW is the wake velocity behind the rotor, D is
the rotor diameter, CT is the thrust coeﬀicient, and σ is the standard deviation of the
Gaussian-like velocity deficit profile as a function of x downstream distance. The standard
deviation is given by the following equation:
σ
D = k∗x
D + ϵ
(2.13)
where k∗is the wake expansion coeﬀicient (growth rate) and ϵ is an abbreviated coeﬀicient
term related to the thrust coeﬀicient, in which it dictates the standard deviation near the
rotor (as x →0). This formulation of the Bastankhah wake model is in dimensional form,
which might appear slightly different in many dimensionless (i.e. normalized coordinate)
forms found in various studies.
Unlike the Jensen model, this Gaussian based model yields a continuous and differen-
tiable velocity field, which allows both gradient-free and gradient-based algorithms. The
Gaussian profile allows for a more realistic wake profile than the constant wake profile
found in a Jensen model, which in turn results in a more accurate representation of wake
Page 15 of 64
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Wind Farm Wake Modeling
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
recovery and cross-stream diffusion [6]. With that said, the model is still reliant on empir-
ically parameter tuning, which limits accuracy under cross-comparison wind farm studies,
where each wind farm has different atmospheric conditions.
TurbOPark Wake Model
The TurbOPark model has been developed as part of a wake modeling project by lead off-
shore wind developer Ørsted in 2022. Petersen et al. [21] based his model on the physical
realism of Gaussian formulations, and brought a new formulation for the wake expansion
behavior (which was mostly linear). Acting as one of the latest proposed wake models,
it introduces a non-linear, turbulence-dependent wake expansion that varies with both
ambient and wake-generated turbulence intensity. Inheriting the Bastankhah wake pro-
file in Equation 2.12, TurbOPark develops a new analytic equation for σ (Equation 2.13),
the standard deviation of the velocity deficit profile. To avoid the math complex analytic
solution, the differential version is presented here to facilitate understanding:
dσ
dx = A
√
I2
0 + I2
w(x)
(2.14)
where A = 0.04 is a wake expansion calibration parameter for offshore wind farms, I0
is the ambient turbulence intensity and Iw(x) is the wake-generated turbulence.
The
wake-generated portion as a function of downstream distance x is then given by:
Iw(x) =
1
c1 + c2
x/D
√CT
(2.15)
where c1 = 1.5 and c2 = 0.8 are empirically determined, CT is the thrust coeﬀicient and
D is the rotor diameter.
By adding wake-generated turbulence to the formulation, it increases the accuracy of
representing wake effects across large offshore clusters and inter-farm wake interactions.
Validation of the model has been done using a large range of SCADA data from the
company. For large offshore clusters, the wake model has been validated with the Lon-
don Array wind farm, which is in close proximity with the Thanet wind farm [21]. For
inter-farm wake interactions, the wake model has been validated across 19 wind farms in
Northern Europe [24], resulting in an uncertainty of less than 10 %. This wake model will
be interpreted as the most promising wake model in general. Thus, it will be used as a
benchmarking feature in the methodology section.
Page 16 of 64
==PAGE:24==
2.5
Design of Experiments (DOE)2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
2.5
Design of Experiments (DOE)
Before moving into methodology, I believe it is important to touch on the statistical
foundation that supports the comparative and impact analysis in this thesis. The concept
of Design of Experiments (DOE), and the software used for its implementation, JMP, is
introduced.
Design of Experiments (DOE) is a systematic statistical approach to planning, conducting,
analyzing, and interpreting controlled experiments. As described by Montgomery [25],
the primary objective of DOE is to understand how multiple variables (known as factors)
influence one or more response variables of interest. As an example, the various factors in
my impact analysis are the optimizing parameters, problem characteristics and algorithms,
and the response variable is the optimized AEP improvement. Unlike traditional one-
factor at a time approach, DOE allows the simultaneous testing of several factors at
different levels, which provide insight into their individual effects as well as their potential
interactions. As such, it makes DOE an eﬀicient method for exploring complex systems
where nonlinear and coupled relationship exist.
In the context of WFLO, DOE is particularly valuable due to the optimization outcome
relying on a multitude of interrelated parameters - such as the wake model, wind rose
type, minimum turbine spacing, algorithm choice etc. If a full factorial experiment is
conducted on 9 factors with two levels (i.e. each factor is tested at high and low level
with every type of combination) , it will require 29 = 512 runs. From an optimization
perspective, the number of runs is not extraordinary, but the study consists of not only
two levels. Instead, there are 7 algorithms (levels), 3 types of wake models, and 3 levels
for the remaining 6 discrete factors, which is more like 38 · 7 = 45927 runs, even without
replications. Thus, DOE is essential to provide statistically balanced sampling of the
design space, enabling the reduction of the number of experiment runs required and
keeping solid unbiased quantitative assessment for impact analysis.
If there were only limited factors with two levels each, one might be able to construct the
experiment manually, as deriving the fractional factorial (i.e. a design that reduces the
number of experiments compared to a full factorial while still exploring the design space
to the largest extent through orthogonality) is possible.
In this study, unfortunately,
the mixed factor and mixed level approach is highly complex and a statistical software
is required. JMP (developed by SAS Institute) [26], is a commercial statistical analysis
software that specializes in experimental designs, especially for mixed-level designs with
built-in statistical eﬀiciency criteria. As such, a custom experimental design is required,
and it is believed that JMP will be the most professional statistical engine to complete
the job.
Page 17 of 64
==PAGE:25==
3
METHODOLOGY
3
Methodology
Having had a top-down approach towards understanding the background/literature knowl-
edge required for the study, I am now going to start the methodology section from a
bottom-up approach, starting with the core optimization problem, and the factor descrip-
tions used in the impact analysis. In the same section, assumptions and simplifications
will be discussed. Afterwards, the optimization framework will be constructed using some
DTU in house tools. Lastly, the DOE impact analysis experiment plan is given.
3.1
The optimization problem
Even though the formulation of the objective functions may differ, the overall structure
of a wind farm layout optimization is similar. For NWT wind turbines, the layout is given
by their x and y coordinates, denoted as:
L = [X, Y] = [x1, x2, ..., xNW T , y1, y2, ..., yNW T ]T
(3.1)
As such, it is outlined that for NWT turbines, there will be 2NWT number of design
variables, which acts as input towards the optimization. The objective function of the
optimization problem then becomes:
Find L = [X, Y] = [x1, x2, ..., xNW T , y1, y2, ..., yNW T ]T
that minimizes f(L) = −AEP(L)
subject to: (xi, yi) ∈Ω
and
∥(xi, yi) −(xj, yj)∥≥dmin
for i ̸= j
where
i = 1, . . . , NWT
and
j = 1, . . . , NWT
(3.2)
where −AEP(L) is the objective function, dmin is the minimum spacing distance between
turbines and Ωis the boundary of the wind farm. Since many optimization frameworks are
designed to minimize an objective function, the objective function of maximizing AEP
is reformulated as minimizing the negative of AEP. The two constraints marking the
optimization problem is that the turbines must be placed inside the wind farm boundary
and that two wind turbines must be separated by at least a distance of dmin.
To calculate the annual energy production −AEP(L) of a given layout L, a number of
models must be implemented into the optimization problem. In this study, the task of
calculating the objective function is again done through the Python-based open source
wind farm simulation tool PyWake [22].
Readers are referred to Feng and Shen [12]
for a more detailed theory explanation of the objective calculation. The following few
paragraphs will then briefly detail the process of calculating the objective function.
Page 18 of 64
==PAGE:26==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
There are overall three major “models” to consider: turbine specifications, wind conditions
and wake modeling. These can be seen in the form through the following equation:
AEP = 8760
NW D
∑
i=1
NW S
∑
j=1
NW T
∑
k=1
P(Vk(vj, θi, L)) · p(vj|θi)
(3.3)
where NWD, NWS and NWT are the discretized form for the number of wind directions,
wind speeds and wind turbines. The first term P(Vk(vj, θi, L)) is the power output which
is dependent on the wake effected wind speed Vk, and in turn dependent on the reference
wind speed vj, the wind direction θi and the wind farm layout L. The second term dictates
the probability of occurrence of a reference wind speed vj given the wind direction θi.
In this study, wind conditions are modeled through a Weibull distributed wind speed site,
where for each wind sector, a scale A and shape parameter k is applied. Each wind sector
is assigned a probability p that the wind will come from that direction. The result is often
known as a wind rose, which will be seen in multiple later sections. From the perspective
of the given turbine, the power curve P(v), the coeﬀicient of thrust curve CT(v), the
operating wind speed range, hub height hhub, rotor diameter D must also be provided.
These specifications are often provided by the manufacturer, or simulated from theory-
based calculations. The power curve P(v) specifies the power output given a certain wind
speed, while the coeﬀicient of thrust curve CT(v) plays an important role in determining
the extent of the wake produced. Finally, given the layout, turbine specifications and
the wind conditions, the wake interactions can be then calculated using a preferred wake
model, which completes the requirements for calculating the objective function.
3.1.1
Impact Factor Descriptions
This study focuses on the impact of various factors involved in a WFLO problem. There-
fore, apart from the algorithm choice, these factors are split between problem character-
istics and optimizing parameters. The definition of problem characteristics mainly cover
factors related to the resource assessment, or early phase of a wind farm development,
such as the shape of the wind farm or the wind rose type. Optimizing parameters, on the
other hand, involve factors that occur during the optimization process, such as which wake
model to choose or the number of wind sectors to model in the optimization. In Table 3.1,
all the factors, depending which “type” they are, are listed with their corresponding lev-
els. It is noted that there are a lot more factors involved in a WFLO problem, but these
ones are chosen based on experience while working with past literature and optimization.
Apart from algorithm and wake models, which are mentioned in the background section,
all other factors will be detailed in the next few paragraphs along with how the test wind
farm layout is constructed.
Page 19 of 64
==PAGE:27==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
Table 3.1: Summary of factors, levels, and their classification in the impact analysis
study
Factor
Levels
Category
Number of Turbines
16, 25, 36
Problem Characteristic
Weibull Scale Parameter A [m/s]
7.5, 8.5, 10
Problem Characteristic
Wind Rose Type
Unidirectional, Bimodal, Uniform
Problem Characteristic
Shape of Wind Farm
Circle, Diamond, Square
Problem Characteristic
Minimum Turbine Spacing dmin [m]
3D, 4D, 5D
Problem Characteristic
Wake Model
Jensen, Bastankhah, TurbOPark
Optimizing Parameter
Thrust Curve (CT)
Normal, Constant, Two-Level
Optimizing Parameter
No. of Wind Rose Sector
12, 72, 360
Optimizing Parameter
Algorithm
RS, LS, ABC, CMAES, MFO, PSO, RCGA
Algorithm Choice
Problem Characteristics
To run the impact analysis study with various factors, the problem characteristics are
used to create an idealized offshore wind farm consisting of IEA 15MW turbines with
hhub = 150 m and D = 240 m. Further specifications for the wind turbine can be seen in
[27]. The offshore characteristic is used as there will be minimal terrain effects impacting
the factors. Given the number of turbines, a 5D gridded layout is created in the form
of 4x4, 5x5, and 6x6 in a square. These form the initial layout of the wind farm and
is constant throughout the study. The boundary of the wind farm is then created with
the same grid layout, but with 8D spacing, allowing enough space for wind turbines to
optimize given the minimum turbine spacing dmin of 3D, 4D and 5D. The area of the
wind farm boundary is set as a constant while converting to a diamond (square rotated
by 45 degrees) and circle shape. To have a better visualization of the idealized wind farm,
three examples are shown in Figure 3.1 with 16, 25 and 36 wind turbines with different
shapes.
Figure 3.1: Initial layouts with grid layout of 16 turbines in square boundary (left), 25
turbines in diamond boundary (middle) and 36 turbines in circle boundary (right)
After defining the number of turbines and shape of wind farm problem characteristics, it is
possible to define the wind conditions. In the impact analysis, wind conditions are based
Page 20 of 64
==PAGE:28==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
on the HornsRev1 wind farm in Denmark used in the TopDesign paper [28], retaining the
same turbulence intensity of I = 0.1, shear power law exponent of α = 0.12 and reference
height of href = 62 m. It is noted that for wind conditions measured at different heights
from the hub height, the wind profile power law is used to extrapolate the wind speeds
(i.e. the weibull distribution scale parameter). The following equation is given:
Aup = A
(hhub
href
)α
(3.4)
where Aup represents the upscale weibull scale parameter, and A is given by the three
testing levels mentioned in Table 3.1. The levels of 7.5 m/s, 8.5 m/s and 10 m/s also
correspond to the class III, II, I in the IEC 61400 wind classification [29]. It it noted
that although the weibull scale parameter is not a direct representation of the mean wind
speed, it is suﬀicient to differentiate between the three levels in this study after up scaling.
Given the constant scale parameter A, the Weibull distribution is the same throughout
each sector with the following equation:
f(v) = k
v
( v
Aup
)k
exp

−
( v
Aup
)k

(3.5)
where k represents the shape parameter, Aup is the upscale weibull scale parameter, and
v is a given reference wind speed. The shape parameter has been chosen to be k = 2 as
a simplification. In Figure 3.2, the three levels of weibull distributions can be seen.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed (m/s)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Probability Density Function
Aup = 8.34 m/s, k = 2.0
µ = 7.39 m/s
Aup = 9.45 m/s, k = 2.0
µ = 8.38 m/s
Aup = 11.12 m/s, k = 2.0
µ = 9.85 m/s
Figure 3.2: Weibull distributions at hub height hhub = 150 m for the impact analysis
study
Page 21 of 64
==PAGE:29==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
To close off the problem characteristics, the wind rose type must be specified. The wind
rose dictates the probability of the wind coming from a certain direction. In this study,
three types of wind roses are primarily tested, uniform, bimodal and uni-direction. In
Figure 3.3, it is possible to see an example of the three wind roses with 72 sectors (5◦per
sector). It is important to note that in the impact analysis, the Weibull parameters are
assumed to be the same across all wind sector directions.
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.005
0.010
Uniform
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
Unidirection
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.02
0.04
0.06
Bimodal
Figure 3.3: Wind rose types used in the impact study with 72 wind direction sectors
The uniform wind rose (isotropic wind conditions) distributes equal probability across all
wind sectors. The unidirectional wind rose concentrates 80 % of the wind probability in a
60◦(±30◦) spread around the western direction (270◦) via a Gaussian distribution. The
remaining 20% are distributed equally among the other sectors. A similar procedure is
done with the bimodal wind rose, which it creates two dominant peaks at wind direction
East (90◦) and West (270◦), each with a 40◦spread, totaling 60 % of the probability
(each peak has 30 %). The remaining 40% is distributed uniformly across other sectors.
This approach, although not entirely realistic, ensures that each wind rose maintains a
consistent distribution across various number of wind sectors.
Optimizing Parameters
Since the wake model has already been detailed in the background section, the remaining
two optimizing parameters are presented. The first parameter, is the number of wind
sectors. As an extension to the wind rose, this variable is closely correlated to the the
precision of the wind conditions at a certain site. From real life experience, wind does not
blow in 12 sectors, and one will definitely not experience the same wind within a range of
30◦degree sector. In contrast, wind blows from all directions, which is why three levels
are presented, which are 12, 72, and 360 wind sectors. These three levels thus corresponds
to a 30◦, 5◦and 1◦degree sector respectively. By discretizing the wind rose into smaller
sectors, the hope is to have a more accurate reflection of the wake effects that each turbine
experiences in the wind farm.
Page 22 of 64
==PAGE:30==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
The second parameter, is the coeﬀicient of thrust curve CT(v), which relates to how the
wake is formed behind a turbine. Across a multitude of studies, there is no clear consensus
on which coeﬀicient of thrust curve a researcher should use, or its effects towards a WFLO
problem. Unless it is clearly provided by the manufacturer, there is a tendency to simply
use a constant coeﬀicient of thrust. As such, three types of coeﬀicient of thrust curves are
used in this study, the normal manufacture CT,normal curve, a simple constant CT,constant
and a simplified theoretical CT,theory curve. Based on the normal curve, the constant is set
at CT,constant = 0.804 between cut-in Vcut−in = 4 m/s and cut-out Vcut−in = 25 m/s wind
speeds. This value is marked by the highest coeﬀicient of thrust, usually seen between
cut-in and rated wind speed. At above rated, pitch control is used to limit the thrust
force, which makes the scaling law T ∝v2 represent the upper bound approximation of
CT, which can be given by the piecewise function:
CT,theory(v) =





CT,constant
Vcut−in < v ≤Vrated
CT,constant(Vrated/v)2
Vrated < v ≤Vcut−out
(3.6)
where Vrated = 10.59 m/s is the rated wind speed of the IEA 15 MW wind turbine. The
CT,theory is assumed to be zero outside the operating wind speed range. In Figure 3.4, a
schematic representation is shown.
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
Wind Speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Thrust Coefficient CT [-]
Normal
Constant
Simplified
Vrated = 10.59 m/s
Figure 3.4: Thrust coeﬀicient CT curve comparison used in the impact analysis study
Compared to problem characteristics, these parameters act more as a tuning variable to
enhance the accuracy of the optimization problem. As such, a benchmark is needed when
comparing these parameters. The benchmark used in this study will be the perceived
most “accurate” level for a wind farm optimization problem. In Table 3.2, it possible to
see which level is used for the optimizing paremeter, while the usage of the benchmark
will be explained in the framework Section 3.2.
Page 23 of 64
==PAGE:31==
3.1
The optimization problem
3
METHODOLOGY
Table 3.2: Benchmark level for optimizing parameter factors
Factor
Benchmark Level
Wake Model
TurbOPark
Thrust Curve (CT)
Normal
No. of Wind Rose Sector
360
3.1.2
Assumptions and simplifications
While an optimization problem is a model of reality, there are numerous assumption and
simplification taken to solve a WFLO problem in a reasonable amount of time. As such,
some of the main assumption and simplifications made throughout the physical modeling
of the wind farm will be outlined here.
1. Flat and homogeneous offshore terrain: Since the site is situated offshore, it is as-
sumed to have a uniform roughness that is close to 0 and no significant topographical
variation. As such, effects from complex terrain and coastal gradients are neglected.
2. Steady-state wind field: The wind conditions are represented by stationary wind-
rose sectors with a Weibull distribution characterized by scale and shape parame-
ters. The ambient turbulence intensity and wind profile power law constants are all
assumed to be based on the HornsRev1 wind farm.
3. 2D Domain with identical turbine: The wind farm is assumed to have the same
15MW IEA turbine with the same turbine height and diameter. Turbine positioning
optimization only occurs in the 2D domain, meaning different turbine heights and
cable infrastructures are neglected.
4. Limited constraints: Only a minimum spacing constraint and boundary constraint
are enforced, aligning with most present WFLO studies. Thus, noise, visual, envi-
ronmental and mooring etc. constraints are neglected.
5. Wind turbine aerodynamics: Turbine power and thrust coeﬀicients are functions
of only local wind speeds, and it is assumed that wind turbines can capture the
wake-effect wind speeds from all directions. Modern turbines can move in three
dimension, yaw, tilt and pitch, though with varying degrees of speed and control.
In this study, however, wind turbine dynamic control systems are not considered
due to their complex computation level.
6. Wake model: Each wake model has its own limitations and assumptions, which
makes them an approximation of the wakes produced by a turbine.
7. Fatigue: Despite being a hot topic in WFLO, fatigue modelling is not incorporated,
and the sole objective of the optimization is increasing annual energy production.
Page 24 of 64
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Frameworks
3
METHODOLOGY
3.2
Frameworks
Having outlined the optimization problem and the relevant impact factors for testing, the
overall framework of the WFLO will be described. This section is split into two parts. In
the first part, TopDesign and TOPFARM will be used to explain how the optimization is
implemented. In the second part, the algorithm and wake model parameters used in the
optimization will be described.
3.2.1
Implementation in TopDesign and TOPFARM
In Section 3.1, the mathematical formulation of the optimization problem is presented,
but it is still unclear how to translate the problem into a digitized platform. In this
study, the platform TopDesign developed by Feng and Søresen [28] is used. Acting as
a plug-in for TOPFARM [30], TopDesign is a Python-based open-source platform that
serves as a tool-chain integration framework for multidisciplinary analysis in wind farm
optimization. TOPFARM is an established open-source optimization framework devel-
oped by DTU specifically for wind farms. The extensive flexibility and modularity ability
in TopDesign allows for various models to be integrated into the complex workflow of
wind farm optimization.
The optimization problem in Equation 3.2 must first be translated into an objective
function that can quantify the constraints in case of violation. In this study, the violation
degree of the wind farm is based on Feng and Søresen [28]. There are two components
to the violation degree, the violation towards the boundary and the violation towards
the spacing requirement. Depending on the boundary type, the boundary violation and
spacing violation is calculated as:
V iolbdr(L) =
NW T
∑
i
max(Dist(xi, yi, Ω), 0)
V iolspc(L) =
NW T
∑
i
NW T
∑
j=1,j̸=i
max(dmin −∥(xi, yi) −(xj, yj)∥, 0)
(3.7)
where Dist(xi, yi, Ω) is calculated as the perpendicular distance away from the boundary
Ω. The sum of the violation:
V ioltot(L) = V iolbdr(L) + V iolspc(L)
(3.8)
constitutes the violation sum, which gives the following extended objective function:
min
L (−AEP(L) + w · V ioltot(L))
(3.9)
Page 25 of 64
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Frameworks
3
METHODOLOGY
where w is a penalty weighting parameter, and it takes a large number in order to penalize
the infeasible layouts.
Using the extended objective function, a general framework for optimization can be built.
Adapted from the evaluation system in Feng and Søresen [28], Figure 3.5 shows the
general optimization work used in solving the optimization problem. The framework keeps
the novel approach that saves computational efforts when calculating AEP for infeasible
layouts. This tweak, compared to traditional approaches, can be followed by the rule:
AEP(Lnew) =





AEP(Lnew)
V ioltot(Lnew) = 0
AEP(Lpre)
V ioltot(Lnew) > 0
(3.10)
where AEP computations are avoided for infeasible layouts. It is assumed that the an-
nual energy production increase is smaller than the penalty term. As such, during the
iteration/generation of algorithms, the infeasible layouts will always have a larger (less
negative) objective value when using the previous calculated AEP.
START
END
Input Design Parameters, 
Initial Evaluation and Benchmark
Is budget
 exceeded?
Calculate violation
Is total violation 
larger than 0
Perform an AEP
evaluation
Use previous AEP
Value
Update layout based
on algorithm
False
True
True
False
Compute extended
objective function and
update
Evaluate final layout
using benchmark
Figure 3.5: Optimization framework used in solving the optimization problem
Page 26 of 64
==PAGE:34==
3.2
Frameworks
3
METHODOLOGY
However, due to this novel method, cross-comparison between algorithms is diﬀicult as the
number of iterations does not equate to the algorithm actual feasible layouts iterations
(i.e. the AEP evaluation number). As such, a budget system of the number of AEP
evaluations is implemented, where the same metric is used across all algorithms. Once it
hits the limit, the algorithm will stop and the best layout is recorded.
Another new feature of the framework, is the benchmark evaluation for the optimizing
parameters outlined in Table 3.2. To have the same metric to compare, during the initial
evaluation, the benchmark settings are also evaluated. The same is done after the algo-
rithm is done. This approach allows a fair comparison of optimizing parameters related
to a benchmark level. In other words, it answers the question does choosing different
optimizing parameters during optimization affect ultimate AEP improvement calculated
from a benchmark level.
Finally, evaluation variables can be computed. The AEP increase is then given by:
∆AEPimpr,bench = AEPopt,bench −AEPinit,bench
(3.11)
where AEPopt,bench is the optimized AEP and AEPinit,bench is the initial layout AEP, both
using the benchmark parameters. The corresponding values of AEP without benchmark-
ing is then highligted with a subscript w/o, such as AEPinit,w/o. With that said, since
there are different levels for the number of turbines, strictly comparing the absolute AEP
increase is insuﬀicient, therefore a relative improvement variable is given and used in the
impact analysis:
AEPimpr,bench = ∆AEPimpr,bench
AEPinit,bench
(3.12)
The mean of the relative and absolute improvement compared to the baseline layouts are
then given as:
AEP impr,bench =
1
nrep
nrep
∑
i
AEP i
impr,bench
,
∆AEP impr,bench =
1
nrep
nrep
∑
i
∆AEP i
impr,bench
(3.13)
where nrep is the number of replication per test case. Unless otherwise stated, AEP impr,bench
is used throughout the study and is known as the “Mean improvement AEP impr,bench [%]”,
“Mean AEP increase [%]” or similar in plot labels for easier understanding.
Page 27 of 64
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Frameworks
3
METHODOLOGY
3.2.2
Algorithm and wake model parameters
The algorithm and wake model parameters are required for a smooth run of an optimiza-
tion problem. Due to the short time-frame and large amount of wind farm optimization
cases, tuning parameters for each case is non-realistic and detours from the main goal of
a cross-comparison using optimization algorithms in general. As such, for each algorithm,
many parameters are inherited from previous literature, which can be seen as a summary
in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Overall algorithm parameters used in this study
Algorithm
Parameter
Description
Random Search (RS)
None
None
Local Search (LS)
nn = 4
Number of nearest neighbors
prev = 0.1
Reversal probability
σdist,init = 6000.0
Initial displacement standard deviation
σdir,init = 1.0
Initial direction standard deviation
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
kpop = 50
Population size*
α = 0.4
Inertia weight
βl = 2.0
Local acceleration coeﬀicient
βg = 2.0
Global acceleration coeﬀicient
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC)
kpop = 50
Population size*
kscout,max = 2NWTkpop
Abandonment limit before scout phase
CMAES
kpop = 50
Population size*
σ = 0.2
Initial global step size for sampling
Moth-Flame Optimization (MFO)
kpop = 50
Population size*
b = 1.0
Logarithmic-spiral convergence parameter
Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA)
kpop = 50
Population size*
pcrossover = 0.9
Crossover probability
ϕ0 = 0.3
Mutation amplitude bound
*: Population size kpop starts at 50 for 16 turbines, and then increases to 100 and 150 for 25 and 36 turbines respectively
Across all algorithms, there is a budget limit number of AEP evaluations, which is set
at neval = 10000 evaluations, meaning when the number of AEP evaluations reaches the
limit, the algorithm exits and the best layout is recorded. In the case where an algorithm
gets stuck, an infinite loop is avoided by setting a maximum amount of generations at
ngen,max = 30000 (and depending on population kpop, niter,max = 30000kpop iterations for
RS and LS).
Lastly, across the three wake models used, the literature recommended values for offshore
conditions are used, since it best represents the accuracy of the models as validated by
the authors. Similarly, it is important to note that the default way of rotor average model
and superposition is used. These parameters can be seen in Table 3.4. If a certain model
has not been mentioned, such as additional deflection or turbulence model, it is assumed
that the model is not implemented.
Page 28 of 64
==PAGE:36==
3.3
DOE Impact Analysis plan
3
METHODOLOGY
Table 3.4: Overall wake model parameters used in this study
Wake Model
Parameters
Description
Jensen wake model
k = 0.04
Entrainment coeﬀicient
SquaredSum()
Superposition Model
AreaOverlapAvgModel()
Rotor Average Model
Bastankhah wake model
k∗= 0.0324555
Wake expansion coeﬀicient
LinearSum()
Superposition Model
RotorCenter()
Rotor Average Model
TurbOPark wake model
SquaredSum()
Superposition Model
GaussianOverlapAvgModel()
Rotor Average Model
Mirror()
Ground Model
3.3
DOE Impact Analysis plan
The main objective of the DOE is to evaluate how variations in input factors affect the
optimization outcome, which in this study, originates from problem characteristics (e.g.
wind conditions and farm geometry), optimizing parameter choices (e.g. wake model,
thrust curve), and algorithms. As such, DOE is used in this study to reveal which param-
eters have the greatest impact on AEP performance, thereby guiding recommendations
for model selection and framework configuration. For the factors and levels used in this
study, readers are referred to Table 3.1.
Due to the large number of factors and levels, doing a fractional design would be computa-
tionally diﬀicult and beyond the scope of a comparison study. As such, a custom design is
implemented using a D-optimality criteria. As specified by JMP, the D-optimality criteria
is desirable for “screening designs, experiments that focus on estimating effects or testing
for significance and designs where identifying the active factors is the experimental goal”
[31]. The extended theory of how D-optimality works is beyond the scope of this study,
but the core idea is to maximize the index defined by the following equation:
Doptimality = det(X′X)
(3.14)
where X represent the matrix with runs that consists of the factors in various combina-
tions. Given a number of runs, JMP selects the best combination of runs to maximize
this parameter, thus ensuring the main design space is fully explored. The D-optimality
eﬀiciency parameter Defficiency is then computed as a ratio to the maximum D-optimality
criteria.
The final calculated DOE design matrix consists of 168 runs with a Defficiency = 94.19%,
each corresponding to a unique combination of factor levels, ensuring that main effects can
be estimated with minimal confounding. The term confounding refers to when a certain
Page 29 of 64
==PAGE:37==
3.3
DOE Impact Analysis plan
3
METHODOLOGY
factor cannot be distinguished from another factor, which mixes up the response quality.
Due to the large number of reduction of experiments from 38 ·7 = 45927 runs to 168 runs,
only the main effects are focused on. Interaction-effects between factors are neglected in
this study. The reason can be seen in Figure 3.6, where the color map on correlations
indicate that only the main effects were able to be free from confounding (|r| →0).
Main 
Effects
Interaction 
Effects
Main Effects
Interaction Effects
0
1
|r|
Figure 3.6: Color map on correlations adapted from the DOE design evaluation of JMP
In the Appendix, the 168 cases are also listed out in Table 7.1,Table 7.2 and Table 7.3
for reference. For each DOE run, the corresponding parameter combination is executed
within the TopDesign framework described in Section 3.2. All runs are performed using
five replications, and random seeds are used with a set pseudo-random number generator
to eliminate stochastic bias and ensure reproducibility. After all runs have been collected,
the data is analyzed through an analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine the statis-
tical significance of each factor and its contribution to response variation. Subsequently,
a Mann-Whitney U test [32] is also applied to the results differentiated by various algo-
rithms. The threshold for significance is set at p = 0.05, or in other words, at least 95%
confidence to reject the null hypothesis (the null hypothesis is given that that the factor is
non-significant). The DOE impact analysis results are then shown in the next Section 4.
Page 30 of 64
==PAGE:38==
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
4
Impact Analysis
In this section, the impact analysis results are presented along with the identified key
influencing factors. The section starts with some computational performance, followed by
the use of analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test the effects and certain key influencing
factors trend. Afterwards, the section continues with exploring some algorithm choice
nuances, including evolution history, benchmarking variation and the Mann-Whitney U
Test.
4.1
Computational Performance Overview
All 168 cases with five replications (totaling 840 runs) have been run on DTU’s High
Performance Computing (HPC) clusters with varying degree of finishing times depending
on the combination of factor levels. It is found that the range for one single case run
without replication is between 735 to 49155 seconds (translating to around 10 minutes
up to 14 hours), resembling a stark contrast among different combinations in the cases.
Some of the more evident factor levels that prolonged the optimization time is the wake
model setting, algorithm choice and number of wind turbines. In Figure 4.1, it is possible
to see that by varying the level of these factors, there is a significant difference in the time
required for an optimization run.
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
CPU Time [sec]
Bastankhah
Jensen
TurbOPark
Wake Model
16
25
36
Number of Turbines
Dark blue diamonds (
) indicate mean values
Figure 4.1: CPU Time variation box plots through the perspective of various factors
Whilst the time difference in wake models and number of turbines can be attributed to
an increase in computational complexity, the difference in algorithm choice is less trivial.
It is found that certain single-solution based algorithms such as RS and generation-based
algorithms such as MFO, PSO and RCGA in average producing cases with a much longer
time than its counterparts. A probable reason for RS can be attributed to the completely
stochastic nature of the algorithm, which produces infeasible layouts at a higher rate,
prolonging the optimization process. For MFO, PSO and RCGA, the combination of
Page 31 of 64
==PAGE:39==
4.2
Effects Test
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
poor algorithm eﬀiciency and failure in the heuristic to find feasible layouts could have
caused the longer time.
As an additional note, the possible outliers shown across all
algorithms mainly showcases diﬀicult cases where the algorithm struggle to find a feasible
layout, thereby using more generation/iterations and longer time. In the case of RCGA
specifically, the two possible outliers are the only 2 cases (out of all 168 cases) that
encountered one or more runs that did not exceed the allowed number of AEP evaluations
even at the max limit. With that said, the study does not dig further into the topic as
the primary purpose is to screen significant effects rather than eﬀiciency metrics.
4.2
Effects Test
For established gradient-free algorithms in WFLO, there is often the choice between using
the maximum AEP increase or the mean AEP increase out of the replication runs to fit the
model and proceed with the analysis of variance (ANOVA). In this study, both choices are
made, but the mean AEP increase is shown and analyzed in the report. The reason to use
the mean AEP increase stems from a more objective look towards the algorithm, as the
robustness of an algorithm also determines whether the algorithm is better than another.
The counterpart result will be listed in the appendix for reference, and differences will be
mentioned where appropriate.
Before analyzing the individual factor effects, several indicators must be presented to
assess the goodness of fit of the ANOVA model. In Figure 4.2, the plot compares the
observed responses against the model’s predicted values of the 168 cases.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mean AEP increase [%] Actual
0
5
10
15
Mean AEP increase [%] Predicted 
RMSE=1.4598 RSq=0.81 PValue=<.0001
Figure 4.2: Actual vs. Prediction plot using Mean AEP increase [%] to fit the model
Page 32 of 64
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Effects Test
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
The blue line in the figure represents the null-hypothesis, where the model does not
depend on any factor, while the solid red line represents that the tested factors indeed
can be modeled as a linear regression, a prerequisite for ANOVA. The light red area
signifies a confidence interval, where when it does not engulf the blue line, it acts as an
alternative representation of rejecting the null-hypothesis. A strong linear trend along
the line with a coeﬀicient of determination of R2 = 0.81 indicates that the fitted model
explains a large variability of the tested factors. Subsequently, the root mean square error
of RMSE = 1.46 % and model’s p-value of pmodel < 0.0001 confirms the robustness of the
model fit. It is noted that if using the max AEP increase as the response variable (seen
in appendix Figure 7.1), the model correlation increases to R2 = 0.87, a sign that worse
performing runs are excluded successfully.
Another prerequisite of ANOVA is that the residuals must be of constant variance situated
around a mean zero. In other words, it should follow a normal distribution. The studen-
tized residual (a standardized way to represent residuals) produced by JMP is shown in
Figure 4.3. In such a diagnostic plot, the green line and red line correspond to the 95%
individual t-distribution and 95% Bonferroni limits [33] respectively. A point lying in
between the green and red limits are denoted as “possible” outliers. while outside the red
limits are denoted as “probable” outliers. In this study, apart from 2 “probable” outliers
and 5 ”possible” outliers, the other 95% of cases fall inside the limits. The characteristic
of no visible trend and points centered around 0 confirms the prerequisite of residual nor-
mality. A similar plot is given in the case of using max AEP increase (seen in appendix
Figure 7.2). It is noted that outliers were not removed to express a more fair judgment
towards algorithm effects.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Studentized 
Residual
0
50
100
150
DOE Case Number
Figure 4.3: Studentized Residuals using Mean AEP increase [%] to fit the model
In Table 4.1, the effect tests from ANOVA results produced by JMP can be seen with the
degree of freedom (nlevels −1 for categorical factors), the sum of squares, the F-ratio or
F-statistic and the p-value. The F-ratio represents a ratio between the variance explained
by the given factor to the unexplained residual variance, or background noise. The higher
Page 33 of 64
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Key Influencing Factors trend
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
the ratio, the more probable that this factor accounts for a large variability in mean
AEP increase compared to random noise. As such, in order of importance, the wind
rose type, the Weibull parameter A, the algorithm, the number of turbines and minimum
wind farm spacing is found to be significant.
Interestingly, all optimizing parameters
were found to be non-significant. In other words, changing optimizing parameters does
not have a significant influence towards the end optimization objecting value if using the
benchmark as evaluation.
A plausible way to explain this phenomena is that despite
the level of accuracy in optimizing parameters, the direction of optimization is consistent
through-out the different levels. As an example, no matter which wake model used, it is
the question of which model is more accurate, not which model is scientifically proven,
as they all are validated to a certain extent. In other cases, the similarity between the
different-levels also diminishes the variation. For example, the three different types of
thrust curves all share a similar profile between cut-in and rated wind speed, which is the
main operating region given the study wind profile. The difference only happens at above
rated wind speed, which occurs at a much lower probability. Therefore, it allows layouts
to arrive to a similar objective value at the end of optimization. A similar conclusion is
arrived if using the max AEP increase approach, where the notable discrepancy is that the
shape of wind farm also becomes significant, seen in appendix Table 7.4. These significant
factors will form the basis of the case studies described in Section 5.
Table 4.1: Effect tests from ANOVA results based on mean AEP increase and ranked
by sum of squares. Factors in bold are significant.
Factors
DoF
Sum of Squares
F-Ratio
p-value
Wind Rose Type
2
830.0796
194.7665
< .0001
Weibull A
1
303.8633
142.5945
< .0001
Algorithm
6
132.0775
10.3300
< .0001
No. of Turbines
1
66.7706
31.3336
< .0001
Minimum Wind Farm Spacing
1
31.7782
14.9126
0.0002
Shape Wind Farm
2
3.9449
0.9256
0.3985
No. of Wind Rose Sector
1
3.4888
1.6372
0.2027
Wake Model
2
2.8096
0.6592
0.5188
Thrust Curve
2
0.3763
0.0883
0.9155
4.3
Key Influencing Factors trend
To interpret the trend of the significant influencing factors, the mean AEP improvement
of the 168 cases is plotted as box plots for each factor level. The trends for the wind rose
type, number of turbines, minimum spacing, and Weibull can be thus seen in Figure 4.4.
One of the highest influencing factors seen in Table 4.1 is the wind rose type. Wind
farms exposed to a bimodal wind distribution achieved the highest median and mean
Page 34 of 64
==PAGE:42==
4.3
Key Influencing Factors trend
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
in AEP increase, followed by unidirectional and then uniform distributions. The trend
reflects that when the wind resource concentrated around a limited number of prevailing
directions results in a more effective optimization with larger relative increase in AEP.
Wake mitigation is much less eﬀicient in uniform distributions as turbine wakes cannot be
easily avoided. The contrast between the bimodal and unidirectional distributions sparks
some interest and the following reason is proposed.
Due to the bimodal distribution
being 180 degrees apart (West and East), the initial gridded layout is subject to double
penalization. As a such, the baseline AEP tends to be lower, offering a larger margin
for improvement. In contrast, a unidirectional distribution penalizes the layout primarily
along a single direction, meaning the initial layout is already relatively eﬀicient for that
one prevailing inflow. Nonetheless, due to the many factors involved, it is diﬀicult to
explain this discrepancy, and readers are referred to case study 1 in Section 5.2.
Bimodal
Unidirection
Uniform
Wind Rose Type
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
16
25
36
Number of Turbines
3
4
5
Minimum Spacing (D)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
7.5
8.5
10.0
Weibull A [m/s]
Dark blue diamonds (
) indicate mean values
Figure 4.4: Significant influencing factors trend at various levels
A more trivial and clear decreasing trend in AEP improvement is observed with increasing
Weibull A, or can be interpreted more simply as an increase in mean wind speed. Given the
set-up area of the optimization problem, the wind farms with lower average wind speeds
has more optimization potential compared to higher mean wind speeds. Two factors can
be mentioned here. For one, the nonlinear relationship between wind speed and coeﬀicient
Page 35 of 64
==PAGE:43==
4.3
Key Influencing Factors trend
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
of thrust makes the turbine thrust decrease with increase of wind speed distribution. The
reason is that after rated wind speed, the turbine operating power is reduced to its name-
plate power through pitching. As such, a higher mean wind speed distribution experiences
lower wake effects and turbulence, reducing the improvement potential of a wind farm
layout optimization. It is important to note that this observation is not to promote the
thinking that higher mean wind speed distributions are worse-off. From an absolute AEP
perspective, higher wind speeds almost always delivers a higher AEP than lower wind
speed regions. Thus, it is a representation that higher mean wind speeds narrows the
space for optimization.
The effect of minimum wind farm spacing and number of turbines is less pronounced
but still statistically significant. The minimum wind farm spacing trend suggests a mild
decrease in AEP improvement as spacing increases from 3D to 5D (where D is rotor
diameter), which is also seen in Liang and Liu [34]. A sensitive trade-off occurs, where a
smaller minimum spacing creates stronger wake interactions, but allows more movement
of wind turbines, mitigating the wake losses and obtaining higher AEP. The other way
occurs when an increase of minimum spacing causes more space between turbines, thus
less wakes, but in exchange of more rigid layouts, and less optimization space to enhance
AEP. As such, it is recommended to use the lowest allowed minimum spacing for better
exploration of wind farm optimization space.
In the number of turbines factors, a clear positive correlation is seen. Configurations with
36 turbines yield the highest improvement, while those with 16 turbines show the lowest.
The relative improvement is generally higher for larger wind farms as it exhibits a much
larger ceiling in terms of the possible maximum power produced and number of wind
turbines that can be moved. In smaller wind farms, the number of wake interactions is
limited, and once exploited, it is more diﬀicult for relative improvements. An interesting
case study has therefore been conducted to see the relationship between the number of
turbines under fixed density and fixed area in Section 5.3.
The last and most “blackbox” significant factor is shown in Figure 4.5, which is the algo-
rithm factor. Both the mean AEP improvement with benchmark, and without benchmark
is plotted for reference. As seen, there is no clear “trend” when discussing algorithms,
as they are independently different. The average variation between algorithms is fairly
small, with the random search (RS) performing slightly better than their counterparts
and having the highest mean AEP improvement. The lowest performing algorithm is
then found to be RCGA, with the lowest mean improvement. To further investigate the
algorithms, it is recommended to visit the following two sections Section 4.4, Section 4.5
and also the case study with realistic wind farms in Section 5.4.
Page 36 of 64
==PAGE:44==
4.4
Evolution History and Robustness
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, w/o [%]
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
Dark blue diamonds (
) indicate mean values
Figure 4.5: Mean AEP performance separated with various algorithm, both using with-
out benchmark (left) and with benchmark (right)
One other noticeable difference is the overall down-sizing of AEP improvement when the
benchmark has been applied. The overall trend is still kept the same across all algorithms.
The idea of the benchmark has been applied to model the wind farm most “accurately”
under the given factors levels. As such, it provides an equivalent level of comparison and
eliminates bias. From another perspective, it is also possible to see how more simplified
models, such as Jensen wake model, reducing the number of wind sectors to only 12
sectors and simplified thrust curves inflate the overall AEP improvement.
The more
accurate models tends to be more conservative. In a previous study by Feng and Shen
[12], the same trend is seen when varying different number of wind sectors, supporting
such point of view. The proportion of down-sizing between the benchmarking factors
is unclear, though from data processing, it is experienced that the wake model and the
number of wind sectors plays a major role in conservatism.
4.4
Evolution History and Robustness
To have a closer look at how algorithms behave, it is possible to see the evolution history
of all 840 runs in Figure 4.6, differentiated by the number of turbines levels. Due to each
algorithm stopping at various iteration/generation number, the normalized progress is
shown in the x-axis, and the percentage-wise improvement in AEP without benchmarking
(as benchmarking is only done at the beginning and end of the optimization) is shown in
the y-axis. The differentiation between number of turbines is to have a more comparable
baseline for percentage improvement in AEP. It is noted that due to the different settings
in each of the cases, there are various level of improvements in AEP and it is therefore
diﬀicult to visually assess the superiority of an algorithm.
Page 37 of 64
==PAGE:45==
4.4
Evolution History and Robustness
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Progress [0-1]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Improvement AEPimpr, w/o [%]
16 Turbines
RS
LS
ABC
MFO
CMAES
PSO
RCGA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Progress [0-1]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
25 Turbines
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Progress [0-1]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
36 Turbines
Figure 4.6: Evolution histories plotted using AEP Improvement [%] without benchmark
vs. normalized progress under three levels of number of turbines.
Despite packed with evolution lines, it is still clearly visible that there are certain out-
standing algorithms such as RS, LS and ABC. These algorithms follows a logarithmic
increase in AEP, exhibiting a high eﬀiciency in optimization throughout different num-
ber of turbines. These are also the algorithms that performed well with having an AEP
improvement on the higher range. In Figure 4.7, a randomly selected evolution graph for
each algorithm is taken from the 25 turbine DOE cases.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Progress [0-1]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Improvement AEPimpr, w/o [%]
RS
LS
ABC
MFO
CMAES
PSO
RCGA
Figure 4.7: Evolutionary history comparison for different algorithms randomly taken
from a representative 25 turbine case
On the other hand, algorithms such as RCGA, PSO, and MFO, showed a staggered
evolution trend, suggesting that the optimization progress is easily trapped in a local
optima. An interesting growth pattern is seen with CMAES, resembling a logistic growth
shape in many cases. A plausible explanation is that CMAES achieves a good balance
between exploration in the early stages and exploitation in the later stages.
Page 38 of 64
==PAGE:46==
4.4
Evolution History and Robustness
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
Apart from the evolution history and computational time, another indicator of an algo-
rithm performance is the robustness of the algorithms. With an increase in complexity of
wind farms, full optimization runs can be computationally demanding, leading to a need
of stable algorithms. In Figure 4.8, the mean of each case standard deviation of AEP
improvement differentiated by algorithm is plotted. Visibly seen, algorithms such as RS,
LS, ABC and CMAES that have satisfactory performance in the evolution history also has
the lowest variability and thus the strongest robustness. Although completely stochastic,
random search (RS) had the highest robustness with a mean standard deviation for cases
of less than 0.1 %. On the other side of spectrum, MFO, PSO and RCGA all had lower
robustness, signifying that there is a large variability in the replication runs, and therefore
resulting in additional variability. Nonetheless, these are all observations resulting from
interpretation of graphs, and further statistical testing can be seen in Section 4.5.
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
σ AEP Improvement [%]
Figure 4.8: Mean standard deviation of AEP Improvement per case [%] vs. Algorithm
Page 39 of 64
==PAGE:47==
4.5
Mann-Whitney U Test
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
4.5
Mann-Whitney U Test
From a statistical point of view, the results can undergo a Mahn-Whitney U test [32], or
also known as a Maxi Wilcoxon rank-sum test. This test is a non-parametric tests of the
null-hypothesis that two algorithms are identical. The alternative hypothesis is therefore
assumed to be that one algorithm is stochastically greater than the other. A simplified
procedure is given for understanding:
1. For each pair of algorithms AEP improvement (i.e. each algorithm has 24 cases),
the AEP improvement are ranked together from best to least with numbers 48 to
1, where 48 signifies the best improvement and 1 is the lowest improvement.
2. The ranking is added for each algorithm, where the hypothesis is made that the
algorithm with a higher rank sum is better than the algorithm with a lower rank
sum.
3. Calculate test statistic and p-value, with significance threshold set at p = 0.05.
4. Note: If Algorithm A > Algorithm B is proven to be significant, then the formula-
tion Algorithm B < Algorithm A is also significant. Otherwise, both formulations
are not significant.
The results of the Mann-Whitney U test can be seen in Figure 4.9. From a statistical per-
spective, the difference in algorithms can now be seen to be much smaller than expected,
with RS and ABC having the best performance, though both are only significantly better
against two algorithms.
ABC CMAES LS
MFO
PSO RCGA
RS
Algorithm B
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm A
=
=
=
+
+
=
=
=
=
=
+
=
=
=
=
=
+
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
-
=
=
=
=
-
-
-
-
=
=
-
=
=
=
=
+
+
Statistical Significance Results
(Green: A > B, Red: A < B, Gray: No difference)
ABC
CMAES
LS
MFO
PSO
RCGA
RS
Algorithm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Number of Algorithms
2
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
Algorithm Superiority Count
Significantly Better Than
Significantly Worse Than
Figure 4.9: Mann-Whitney U test matrix (left) and superiority count (right) based on
results of mean AEP improvement differentiated by the algorithm factor
Page 40 of 64
==PAGE:48==
4.5
Mann-Whitney U Test
4
IMPACT ANALYSIS
The majority of algorithms pairings are statistically non significant, which in other words
suggests that it is very diﬀicult for algorithms to perform better across a large variety
of cases. CMAES and LS performed only significantly better than one algorithm, and
MFO is found to be non-significant across all other algorithms. While it is diﬀicult to
see which algorithms are better, RCGA and PSO holds the spot for the worse perform-
ing algorithms, which are found to be significantly worse than two and four algorithms
respectively. Thus, it poses an interesting question, are algorithms significantly better
because they are indeed more versatile and effective, or is it because other algorithms are
proven to be unsatisfactory in such a large-scale impact analysis? The former supports
the viewpoint that algorithms with more stochastic features perform better in general.
This feature is seen in RS as being completely stochastic, in ABC’s scout phase when
the food source shows no improvement, in CMAES random sampling from multivariate
normal distribution and in LS sampling of random direction and step-size. It is valid to
note that MFO, PSO and RCGA all have stochastic features, but at a much lower degree.
The latter viewpoint then directs to the no-free lunch theorem, where it can be said that
not all algorithms are superior than other in general. However, given the vast amount of
factor levels tested, my personal opinion would be the former. In such a complex WFLO
problem, the stochasticity aspect may be more effective to explore the design space than
many algorithms which heavily relies on heuristics, which often traps the solution in a
local optima. With that said, since the wind farms used in the impact analysis are ideal-
istic, the same topic will be discussed again in the case study Section 5.4 where realistic
wind farms are used.
Page 41 of 64
==PAGE:49==
5
CASE STUDIES
5
Case Studies
After the identification of key influencing factors, case studies are done to focus on certain
factors that require further digging. The section starts with an overview of case studies
and optimization parameters used. Subsequently, the three case studies are presented.
In each case study, the additional required theory is first explained, and afterwards, the
results and analysis are shown.
5.1
Overview of case studies
The three case studies target the factors of wind rose type (case study 1), number of wind
turbines (case study 2) and algorithm (case study 3), which apart from Weibull A, are the
three of the highest significant factors found in Table 4.1. Depending on the case study,
various parameters will be changed, and the various factor levels used in the optimization
runs are all shown in Table 5.1. In Table 5.1, it is also possible to see the factor levels that
are variable, which will be further explained in their corresponding sections. For the fixed
variables, the level are chosen based on two factors, one is the eﬀiciency (i.e. RS performed
the best in the impact analysis, or Jensen wake model is indifferent to Bastankhah) and
second is the suitability (i.e. Circle shape so that there is no bias towards different wind
rose types and 360 number of wind sectors to better exhibit the von mises distribution).
Across all case studies, the benchmark system written in Table 3.2, evaluation budget
of 10000 AEP evaluations and five replication per case are also still implemented unless
otherwise stated. Finally, the wind data for HornsRev1 are given in the appendix Table 7.5
for reference.
Table 5.1: Variable and fixed factor among the three case studies
Factor
Case Study 1
Case Study 2
Case Study 3
Number of Turbines
25
Variable
Variable
Weibull scale parameter A [m/s]
10
HornsRev1
Variable
Wind Rose Type
Variable
HornsRev1
Variable
Shape of Wind Farm
Circle
Square
Variable
Minimum Turbine Spacing dmin [m]
4D
3D
3D
Wake Model
Jensen
Jensen
Jensen
Thrust Curve (CT)
Normal
Normal
Normal
No. of Wind Rose Sector
360
12
12
Algorithm
RS
RS
RS,LS,ABC,CMAES,
MFO,PSO,RCGA
Wind Turbine Type
IEA 15MW
IEA 15MW
Variable
Page 42 of 64
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose
5
CASE STUDIES
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose
5.2.1
Von mises distribution
In the first case study, the von Mises distribution outlined in [35], [36] is used, which is a
probability distribution created for directional statistics (i.e. a circular axis), and is given
by:
f(θ, µ, κ) =
1
2πI0(κ)eκ cos(θ−µ)
(5.1)
where I0(κ) is the Bessel function, θ is the angle in radians, µ is the main direction (mean),
and κ is the concentration (i.e. how concentrated the peak is). When there is more than
one peak, a mixture von Mises distributions, which is then given by:
fmix(θ, µh, κh, ωh) =
H
∑
h=1
ωh
1
2πI0(κh)eκh cos(θ−µh)
(5.2)
where H is the number of peaks, and ωh is the weight for h peak. The mixture von
Mises distribution is often used to model the frequency of wind direction and is seen
in numerous past studies, presenting high correlation R2 > 0.95 for various wind roses
with two main peaks H = 2 [35], [36]. Therefore, in this case study, 100 wind roses are
randomly generated, in which 96 are bi-directional and 4 are uni-directional roses over
several dimensions. A selection of these wind roses can be seen in Figure 5.1.
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
ID 1: Unidirectional
=0.5
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
ID 2: Unidirectional
=2.0
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ID 3: Unidirectional
=10.0
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.05
0.10
0.15
ID 4: Unidirectional
=25.0
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
ID 24: Sep=45°
=6.0, 
=1.5
=0.33, 
=0.67
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ID 7: Sep=45°
=1.8, 
=26.0
=0.60, 
=0.40
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
ID 38: Sep=90°
=3.3, 
=1.0
=0.64, 
=0.36
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
ID 45: Sep=90°
=24.2, 
=26.9
=0.32, 
=0.68
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
ID 61: Sep=135°
=1.3, 
=17.8
=0.68, 
=0.32
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
ID 66: Sep=135°
=26.3, 
=7.8
=0.66, 
=0.34
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.02
0.04
0.06
ID 100: Sep=180°
=1.2, 
=14.0
=0.54, 
=0.46
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
ID 93: Sep=180°
=26.3, 
=22.2
=0.70, 
=0.30
Figure 5.1: A selection of wind roses that are tested in the wind rose case study
Page 43 of 64
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose
5
CASE STUDIES
It is noted that the number of sectors in the figure is 72 for aesthetic purpose, while 360
is used in the actual optimization. For uni-directional roses H = 1, it is assumed that
the wind direction of the peak is from the north µuni = 0◦, with the following κuni =
[0.5, 2, 10, 25]. For bi-directional roses (H = 2), the first peak always points north µ1 =
0◦, while the second peak (representing angular separation) is rotated clockwise in the
following directions (in degrees to facilitate understanding) with µ2 = [45◦, 90◦, 135◦, 180◦].
For angles larger than 180◦, a symmetrical shape is obtained, therefore the range stops
at 180◦. For each angular separation µ2, 24 wind roses are randomly generated, where
κ1, κ2, ω1, ω2 are randomly generated numbers given κ ∈[0.1, 30], ω1 ∈(0, 1), where
ω2 = 1 −ω1. For other optimization settings, please refer to Table 5.1.
5.2.2
Results and Analysis
The results of the wind case study reveals certain nuances into how a wind rose affects
the potential AEP improvement of a WFLO optimization problem. Looking solely at
bidirectional wind roses, Figure 5.2 exhibits the relationship between AEP improvement
in three dimensions, the weight balance index, and the weighted concentration index
of the two peaks.
The weight balance index represents the balance of the two peaks
given by a value between 0 and 1, with larger values representing a more balanced wind
rose, while smaller values indicating that one peak dominates another. The weighted
concentration index is then calculated as ωhκh, where larger values indicate that the wind
is more concentrated for that certain peak and more prominent in the wind rose given
the weighting factor.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Weight Balance Index (4ω1ω2)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
Perfect Balance (ω1 = ω2 = 0.5)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Primary Weighted Concentration: ω1
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
Secondary Weighted Concentration: ω2
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
Figure 5.2: Scatter plot of AEP improvement [%] as a function of weight balance index
(4π1π2) and two weighted concentration dimensions ω1κ1 and ω2κ2
Page 44 of 64
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose
5
CASE STUDIES
By interpreting the graphs, two observations can be made. For one, the balance of wind
rose peaks have no apparent correlation effect on the AEP improvement of a WFLO
problem. In other words, having one major peak or two minor peaks in a wind profile
does not conclude that a wind farm has a high AEP improvement potential. However,
when the weight of wind roses ω1 and ω2 are multiplied by their respective concentration
(or how sharp the peak is), some trends start to emerge. On the plot to the left, the
two axis shows the weighted concentration of the primary and secondary peaks, where
the higher the value, the more dominant and “sharp” (i.e. prevailing) the wind is. The
difference in colors then represent the relative AEP improvement, where the lighter the
color, the higher the AEP improvement.
In the figure, wind rose distributions with
higher concentration peaks perform better with a greater optimization potential. On the
other hand, wind which are more uniformly distributed across all direction have limited
improvement potential. With that said, it is possible to see that on the secondary weighted
concentration axis, the increase of AEP improvement is not as evident as the primary axis.
A plausible explanation to this phenomena arises from the inherent bias of calculating a
relative AEP improvement instead of absolute AEP. Since the initial layout is a gridded
layout, wind roses with separation between 0◦, 90◦and 180◦obtains a lower AEP value
at the start due to closer wake effects compared to diagonal wind separations. As such, it
prompts that these layouts have a relatively higher increase potential at the start. Since
the secondary peak is the peak that rotates in this case study, the effects gets muddled
with the relative performance metric.
For further investigation, an absolute AEP versus weighted average concentration plot
is made in Figure 5.3 differentiated by separation angles. The figure showcases a large
amount of information. Given the same Weibull parameters, the gross AEP is the the-
oretical annual energy production that the wind farm can receive assuming all turbines
experiences no wake effects. The mean initial AEP are also plotted in various grey shapes
(corresponding to the angular separation) as a function of the weighted average concen-
tration, which for uni-direction wind roses is κ1, while for bimodal wind roses is the sum
of the primary and secondary weighted concentrations. The mean optimized AEP’s are
then correspondingly plotted with their respective trend lines and correlation metrics.
The figure communicates several findings. First, it confirms the hypothesis that the ini-
tial AEP with wind roses of separation 0◦, 90◦and 180◦is negatively correlated with the
weighted average concentration. Moreover, it is interesting to see that wind roses with
acute and obtuse separation (i.e. 45◦and 135◦), does not follow the strict negative corre-
lation. Instead, the initial AEP defined by these wind roses provide a range. A reasonable
explanation to this behavior is due to the balance of the first peak perpendicular at 0◦,
which impacts the AEP more heavily than the diagonal second peak at 45◦or 135◦. If
the second peak dominates, the initial AEP is then lifted, created a range of values.
Page 45 of 64
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Case Study 1: Wind Rose
5
CASE STUDIES
2045
2050
2055
0
5
10
15
20
25
Weighted Average Concentration: 
1 (Unidirectional) or ω1
1 + ω2
2 (Bimodal)
1650
1675
1700
1725
1750
1775
1800
1825
1850
1875
Mean Absolute AEPbench [GWh/year]
Gross AEP (2051 GWh/year)
Initial AEP 45°
Initial AEP 90°
Initial AEP 135°
Initial AEP 180°
Initial AEP 0° (Unidirectional)
Optimized AEP 45° (n=24)
Optimized AEP 90° (n=24)
Optimized AEP 135° (n=24)
Optimized AEP 180° (n=24)
Optimized AEP 0° (Unidirectional) (n=4)
45° trend (R²=0.872)
90° trend (R²=0.799)
135° trend (R²=0.866)
180° trend (R²=0.873)
Figure 5.3: Weighted Average Concentration vs. Absolute AEP value differentiated by
the peaks separation. The theoretical gross (maximum) AEP without wake effects and
initial AEP of all the layouts are also plotted for reference
The most important finding, however, is the trend of AEP values obtained from the op-
timized layouts. In here, it is possible to see that no matter which angular separation
(between 0◦and 180◦) , the optimized absolute mean AEP is positively correlated with
weighted average concentration in a linear fashion. It is also found that the resulting opti-
mized values are fairly independent from angular separation. One can argue that the 180◦
trend-line has a slight upper edge, but the overall picture is fairly constant, and that is the
optimized layout has a much closer relationship with the weighted average concentration.
Additionally, it is possible to observe that with an increase in concentration of prevailing
winds, the optimization potential broadens while the wake loss is minimized. This results
adds enhanced explanation towards understanding the significant effects caused by wind
rose in a WFLO problem.
Page 46 of 64
==PAGE:54==
5.3
Case Study 2: Area and Density
5
CASE STUDIES
5.3
Case Study 2: Area and Density
5.3.1
Fixed area vs. Fixed density
The second case study is a simpler test on varying the number of turbines in a fixed
area or fixed density setting of a wind farm layout. This case study aims to answer the
question of, given a fixed area or fixed density, how is the optimization potential affected
by varying the number of wind turbines.
Based on the parameter setting mentioned in Table 5.1, the fixed area boundary is con-
structed by a wind farm that is set with 100 IEA 15MW turbines with 5D spacing.
Subsequently, the number of turbines are varied in the range of i2 number of turbines
with i = 2, 3, ..., 10 (i.e. 2x2, 3x3, ... , 10x10 layouts), totaling 9 cases. The initial layout
of these wind farms are grid layouts with spacing 5D with the boundary center as the
center of the wind farms.
As a supplementary information, the well-known cost function by Mosetti et al. [3] is
used in the analysis to explore the fixed area study results from another perspective. It
is noted that this function is not accurate by any means, but more of a indicator of how
cost can be modeled in a highly simplified manner. Being a function of number of wind
turbines, it is given as:
Cost = NWT
(2
3 + 1
2e−0.00174N2
W T
)
(5.3)
The fixed density study is done in a way similar to the fixed area study, but varying
the densities and number of turbines instead. Based on common modern wind farms, the
densities levels of the wind farm are set as ρWF = [3, 5, 9, 11, 13, 15] MW/km2. The area is
then computed based on a number of turbines which has a range of NWT = [10, 20, ..., 100],
totaling 10 levels. The square boundaries are then derived from the total area where the
side distance is the square root of the area. The initial layouts of the wind turbines are set
as random start, as the choice for number of turbines are given in intervals of 10 instead
of grid layouts like in the fixed area study. The option of using intervals of 10 can be
interpreted as an older experimental set-up, where if more time is given, should be tested
with also grid layouts. As such, each case is run with 10 replications instead of 5 to ensure
a fair mean.
5.3.2
Results and Analysis
Shown in Figure 5.4, is a combined result of the fixed area study, which incorporates
the relationship between the mean AEP improvement and the number of turbines, and a
more economically related metric of mean AEP per unit cost and its relationship with the
Page 47 of 64
==PAGE:55==
5.3
Case Study 2: Area and Density
5
CASE STUDIES
number of turbines. Compared to the complex wind rose study in the previous section, the
fixed area study’s result is more intuitive. Given a fixed area, the optimization potential
first enlarges from 2.4 % to 5.7 % with the increases of number of turbines between 4 and
36. At this stage, the turbines layout can be optimally placed so that the wake effects
can be minimized to a minimum. With the increase of number of turbines beyond 36
wind turbines, despite the increase in absolute AEP, the optimization potential decreases
from 5.7 % to 0.5 %. The indication does not mean that wind farms with large number
of wind turbines should be avoided, in fact, with each additional turbine, the absolute
AEP increase outweighs the negative effects of wake effects. Instead, it is an indication
of whether optimization potential is worth it when there is a high number of turbines.
Another smaller observation is that there is larger standard deviation for smaller number
of turbines, compared to a high number configuration. The exact reason is unclear, yet it
is suggested that this is due to more optimization space for a smaller number of turbines,
which creates more solutions and local optima for the random search algorithm.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Turbines
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
2.4%
4.3%
5.4% 5.7%
5.5%
4.8%
3.7%
2.2%
0.5%
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Turbines
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Mean AEPbench per unit Cost [GWh/Cost]
Initial Layout
Optimized Layout
Max AEP/Cost
Figure 5.4: Fixed area case study results with mean AEP improvement vs. number of
turbines (left) and mean AEP per unit cost vs. number of turbines (right)
A cost-function is also implemented post-optimization to see the effects towards the vari-
ation of number of turbines with an economic perspective. As seen in the right plot of
Figure 5.4, the mean AEP per unit cost is plotted for both the initial layout and the
optimized layout. The economies of scale is achieved until 49 turbines for both initial and
optimized layout. After this limit, diseconomies of scale start to appear linearly. The op-
timization potential decrease is also seen as the gap between initial and optimized layouts
decreases. The optimal cost and AEP trade in this fixed case study model is found to
be at 49 turbines, which comparing to modern day wind farms, is a good approximation
regarding a developers need of wind turbine number. As the absolute AEP has positive
correlation with the number of turbines, this match in approximation is largely due to how
the cost function shape behaves. With everything said, the ultimate choice of whether to
Page 48 of 64
==PAGE:56==
5.3
Case Study 2: Area and Density
5
CASE STUDIES
continue enlarging the wind farm relies on a lot more factors which are beyond the scope
of this study, including the price of electricity generated, cost of wind turbines, allowed
area, grid capacity, etc. Nonetheless, from the perspective of WFLO, the most valuable
takeaway is that given a fixed area, the optimization potential of a wind farm significantly
relies on the number of wind turbines, where given a fixed area, the more packed the wind
turbines, the lower the optimization potential.
In the fixed density case study, results are shown in Figure 5.5. The left plot is the relative
mean AEP improvement, while on the right is mean absolute AEP increase, all plotted
against the number of turbines. In the left plot, it is possible to see the significance of
the effects study is confirmed between the range of 10 to 30 turbines. After surpassing 30
turbines, fixing only the density of the wind farm has no significant effect in the relative
improvement of the wind farm.
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Turbines
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
Density
5.0 MW/km²
7.0 MW/km²
9.0 MW/km²
11.0 MW/km²
13.0 MW/km²
15.0 MW/km²
20
40
60
80
100
Number of Turbines
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Mean Improvement ∆AEPimpr, bench [GWh]
Figure 5.5: Fixed density case study results with mean AEP improvement vs. number
of turbines (left) and mean absolute AEP increase vs. number of turbines (right)
In the absolute realm of increases, it is possible to see that the increase of AEP arising from
optimization is fairly linear with the number of turbines increase and is also independent
of the fixed density influences. From another perspective, the marginal benefit of adding
an extra turbine in the optimization is fairly constant. There is, however, an increase in
uncertainty with an increase of wind turbine number, which matches with how the problem
complexity increases with additional design variables. With that said, it is important to
note that random start has been done in this fixed density study, which can also contribute
to the increase in uncertainty of AEP increase in both relative and absolute metrics. In
summary, when only the density is fixed and the area is allowed to adapt with number
of wind turbines, the optimization potential of a wind farm is not affected by the density
parameter. Thus, it is suggested that additional thought should be given to case studies
that ties in the density into other parameters such as the area (seen in the fixed area case
study) or the shape of the wind farm.
Page 49 of 64
==PAGE:57==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5.4.1
Wind Farms Chosen
The third and final case revolve around using realistic wind farms to test the performance
of various algorithms. Due to various non-disclosure agreements (NDA’s) signed with
respective wind farm developers, gaining access to wind farm positioning, wind climate
and turbine data is challenging. As such, only 5 well established wind farms have been
chosen that have publicly available data. These wind farms are all located within Northern
Europe, where the wind farm characteristics can be summarized in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Wind Farm Characteristics for the five test cases
Wind Farm
Country
No. of Turbines
Turbine Type
Rotor Diameter
Hub Height
[m]
[m]
HornsRev 1
DK
80
Vestas V80
80.0
70.0
Lillgrund
SE
48
Siemens 2.3MW
92.3
65.0
OWEZ*
NL
36
Vestas V90
90.0
70.0
Borssele
NL
74
IEA 10MW
198.0
119.0
RS2*
DK
90
Siemens 2.3MW
92.6
68.5
* OWEZ refers to Egmond aan Zee Offshore Wind Farm, and RS2 refers to Rødsand 2 Wind Farm
The initial layout, wind roses, thrust curve and power curve are then given in Figure 5.6,
Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.8 respectively.
2000
0
2000
X Position [m]
3000
2000
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Y Position [m]
Horns Rev 1
1000
0
1000
X Position [m]
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
Y Position [m]
Lillgrund
2000
0
2000
X Position [m]
3000
2000
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Y Position [m]
OWEZ
5000
2500
0
2500
5000
X Position [m]
6000
4000
2000
0
2000
4000
6000
Y Position [m]
Borssele
5000
2500
0
2500
5000
X Position [m]
6000
4000
2000
0
2000
4000
6000
Y Position [m]
RS2
Figure 5.6: Initial Layout of the chosen wind farms
Page 50 of 64
==PAGE:58==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
The layout of the various wind farms are sourced from DTU Wind Energy Wind Data
repository [37]. It is possible to see that various shapes including trapezoidal, curved
polygons and even discontinuous shapes are present, providing a vast array of testing
ground for the algorithms. Furthermore, the wind resources are provided in Figure 5.7,
which resemble a traditional Northern Europe wind condition, with a prevailing wind in
the south-western directions with minor peaks coming from the east. Given the similar
shapes, the frequency of the different wind farms are numerically close. The variation
mainly comes from the weibull A and k parameters, which are presented in the appendix
Table 7.5. The wind conditions data come from an array of sources, where the HornsRev
1 and Lillgrund data originates from PyWake examples [22], OWEZ data originates from
a Measurements of Wind, Wave and Currents technical report by Energy Research Center
of the Netherlands [38], Borssele data originates from IEA Task 37 [39], and RS2 data
originates from Global Wind Atlas project [40].
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
Mean WS: 9.4 m/s
TI: 0.10
Ref. Height: 62 m
Horns Rev 1
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.05
0.10
0.15
Mean WS: 7.8 m/s
TI: 0.060
Ref. Height: 61 m
Lillgrund
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.05
0.10
0.15
Mean WS: 9.7 m/s
TI: 0.10
Ref. Height: 116 m
OWEZ
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Mean WS: 9.4 m/s
TI: 0.071
Ref. Height: 119 m
Borssele
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
Mean WS: 8.8 m/s
TI: 0.090
Ref. Height: 50 m
RS2
Figure 5.7: Wind roses of the chosen wind farms, including turbulence intensity TI,
reference height href and mean wind speed V
Finally, in Figure 5.8, the power and thrust coeﬀicient curves are presented. In total,
four types of wind turbines are being used, the IEA 10MW for Borssele, the Vestas
V80 2MW for HornsRev 1, the Vestas V90 3MW for OWEZ and the Siemens Games
2.3MW for both Lillgrund and RS2. Data for the IEA 10MW was available in Floris (a
Page 51 of 64
==PAGE:59==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
similar python package to PyWake, but developed by NREL) [41], while data for V80
and Siemens 2.3MW are both available in PyWake [22]. For the V90 variant, course
material from “Planning and Development of Wind farms” and WAsP [42] was used to
extract the necessary information. As such, the power ranges from 2 MW up until 10
MW, which covers a large portion of modern day wind farms and provides solid testing
for the algorithms.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed [m/s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Power Output [MW]
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Thrust Coefficient [-]
Horns Rev 1 (Vestas V80 2MW)
Lillgrund (Siemens 2.3MW)
OWEZ (Vestas V90 3MW)
Borssele (IEA 10MW)
RS2 (Siemens 2.3MW)
Figure 5.8: Power curves and coeﬀicient of thrust curves of the various turbines used
in the chosen wind farm and plotted against the operating wind speed range.
Note
that Lillgrund and RS2 uses the same wind turbine type, therefore the curves RS2 and
Lillgrund curves overlap.
5.4.2
Results and Analysis
For each wind farm, all algorithms have been tested with five replications. The mean AEP
improvement for each wind farm and algorithm can then be seen in Figure 5.9, where the
numerical data is given in the appendix Table 7.6. Compared to the screening test results
a visible difference is that depending on the wind farm, the range of improvement has
decreased significantly to only around 0.5 % to 2 %. The sharp decrease can be possibly
explained by two factors. For one, not enough evaluation budget is given to the cases as
the realistic wind farms have a higher complexity in the optimization problem. Secondly,
or the more plausible reason, is that these wind farms were already optimized by their
respected developers, leaving a much smaller room of optimization potential. Most of
the tested wind farm follow a certain pattern, which raises an interesting perspective.
Reflecting back on the fixed area case study, since there is already a high number of
wind turbines, the benefit of optimization decreases as the space is limited. As such,
developers may choose to build the wind farms in a more eye pleasing pattern style.
Another observation, seen in the complex cases of Borssele, is a negative improvement
for RCGA, PSO and MFO algorithm. The reason to this phenomena arises from the two
layouts being so similar to each other, that the difference between the initial and final
Page 52 of 64
==PAGE:60==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
layout is negative when using the benchmark approach. In other words, when running
the optimization using simpler models, the stride of improvement is too small, leaving an
even worse layout. From another perspective, it also suggests that these algorithm deliver
poorly in complex wind farm layout optimization. Interestingly speaking, CMAES, which
had a satisfactory performance in the screening test has performed under the bar in
realistic wind farm optimizations, suggesting that it struggles after a certain number of
design variables. Overall, algorithm RS, LS and ABC are still the front-runners in the
results, where the best runs are seen in Figure 5.10.
HornsRev1
Lillgrund
OWEZ
Borssele
RS2
Wind Farm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Mean Improvement AEPimpr, bench [%]
RS
LS
ABC
MFO
CMAES
PSO
RCGA
Figure 5.9: Optimization performance of various algorithms used on the five different
realistic wind farms.
The best optimization performance across all five wind farms is seen with random search
(RS), which proposes again the importance of stochasticity in highly complex optimization
spaces. In Figure 5.10, the transparent circles represents the initial layout while the dense
squares represents the optimized layout. Given the randomness of the algorithm, the
algorithm still performed extremely well in pushing turbines away towards the border and
adjusting the remaining turbines inside the border, maximizing annual energy production
and minimizing wake losses. The greediness of the algorithm also avoids situations where
the final optimized layout performs worse than the original layout.
Similar to the screening test, statistical significance test of Mann Whitney U is also
performed to see which algorithm performs better than another, and the results is seen in
Figure 5.11. Each algorithm is paired with another algorithm in the same wind farm, and
then tested for 6 comparison test across 5 wind farms, resulting in a maximum threshold
of 30 tests per algorithm with a p-value threshold of 0.05.
Page 53 of 64
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
2000
0
2000
X Position [m]
3000
2000
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Y Position [m]
Horns Rev 1 ( AEP: +0.96%)
1000
0
1000
X Position [m]
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
Y Position [m]
Lillgrund ( AEP: +2.37%)
2000
0
2000
X Position [m]
3000
2000
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Y Position [m]
OWEZ ( AEP: +0.45%)
5000
2500
0
2500
5000
X Position [m]
6000
4000
2000
0
2000
4000
6000
Y Position [m]
Borssele ( AEP: +0.93%)
5000
2500
0
2500
5000
X Position [m]
6000
4000
2000
0
2000
4000
6000
Y Position [m]
RS2 ( AEP: +0.53%)
Initial Layout
Optimized Layout
Figure 5.10: Best optimized layouts (square points) compared to the initial layouts
(transparent circular points) of the 5 tested wind farms. The best optimized layouts all
originate from using RS.
RS
LS
ABC
MFO
CMAES
PSO
RCGA
Algorithm
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
Count
21
16
3
20
2
9
14
3
22
6
15
2
21
Theoretical Maximum
Significantly Better Than
Significantly Worse Than
Figure 5.11: Mann Whitney U test on all algorithm wind farm pairs. A theoretical
maximum of 30 is given if the algorithm outperforms all other algorithms in each wind
farm case.
Page 54 of 64
==PAGE:62==
5.4
Case Study 3: Realistic Wind farm
5
CASE STUDIES
For an algorithm that is significantly better than another, a positive count is given and if
the algorithm is significantly worse than another, a negative is given. Otherwise, no count
is awarded. The net is then added and ranked, with the algorithms to the left being the
best and the right being the worst. From a statistical perspective, it is possible to see that
RS performed the best out of all the algorithms, where it significantly performed better
than another algorithm in 21 pair comparison tests and not one case where it significantly
performed worse than another algorithm. LS and ABC, which both performed well in the
screening test, take second and third place respectively. On the other side of spectrum,
RCGA performed with least satisfactory results, where only in 2 pairs it performed better,
while in 21 pairs it performed worse. From this case study, it is therefore possible to
conclude that there is indeed a difference in algorithmic performance, and algorithms
with more stochastic ingredients had a much more satisfactory performance than other
commonly known generation-based algorithms. From a general perspective, it is therefore
advised to use simpler algorithms such as RS and LS as a way to gain some sense of the
optimization potential in a certain WFLO problem.
Page 55 of 64
==PAGE:63==
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
6
General Discussion
6.1
Key Findings
Although not ground-breaking, there has been a few key findings towards the black box of
wind farm layout optimization. The comprehensive impact analysis through statistically
validated design of experiments laid the groundwork of the study. It is found that the
wind rose type acts as the predominant statistically significant factor affecting the AEP
improvement of a wind farm. Following the wind rose type is the mean wind speed, which
has been represented by the Weibull A scale parameter. Both of these factors closely
correlate to the wind conditions of a wind farm, which implies that the wind resource
of a wind farm has a significant impact towards the quantitative results of a wind farm
layout optimization. Algorithmic choice has been then proven to be statistically significant
in a wind farm layout optimization, where in the seven algorithms tested, at least one
algorithm showed statistically difference compared to the others. Other parameters, such
as number of turbines and minimum wind farm spacing showed statistically significance
at a secondary level, exhibiting a smaller effect. For the remaining factors, the shape of
the wind farm, the number of wind sectors, thrust curve differences and wake model did
not show statistically significance for wind farm layout optimization. As such, all of the
optimizing parameters were found to be non-significant towards the AEP improvement of
a WFLO problem.
The study then continued with three case studies that explored the significant factors on
wind rose type, algorithmic choice, and number of wind turbines. Results from the case
studies strongly reinforced the results from the comprehensive impact analysis. Wind
conditions originating from various wind rose shapes exhibited the largest visible effect
on AEP improvement.
It is found that the concentration of the wind peaks directly
correlates to the AEP improvement of a wind farm. Algorithmic choice also exhibited a
strong effect, where simplistic stochastic algorithms such as RS and LS performed superior
across five realistic wind farm test cases. Varying the number of turbines has only minimal
effect, shown in the fixed area and fixed density case studies. From an overall perspective,
depending on the problem characteristics, optimizing parameters and algorithm choice,
the AEP improvement of a wind farm layout exhibited a large range from close to 0 %
up to almost 20 % in relative AEP improvement. The most common value, however, still
remains at single digits. For layouts that shows extremely limited AEP improvement,
the study also provides an insight into how certain characteristics of a wind farm renders
wind farm layout optimization to be less attractive. This insight is especially present in
the fixed area case study, where when the wind turbine numbers exceed a certain density,
the need of optimization is minimal.
Page 56 of 64
==PAGE:64==
6.2
Problem Characteristics and Optimizing Parameters 6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Due to the wake effects, AEP improvement of wind farms is inherently limited, and the
task of optimization is to exploit the largest possible improvement. As such, it is found
that the central message of the study is to focus primarily on the problem characteristics,
especially the wind resource aspect and algorithmic choice when facing a wind farm opti-
mization. The more suitable these factors are, the higher the AEP improvement potential
of a wind farm.
6.2
Problem Characteristics and Optimizing Parameters
In the factors that belong to problem characteristics, the significant factors are found in
order of decreasing significance is the wind rose type, weibull parameter A (mean wind
speed), number of turbines, minimum wind farm spacing and lastly the non statistically
significant factor of the shape of wind farm. For an “optimal” wind farm with a high
improvement potential, the combination is given by a bimodal wind rose, lower mean
wind speed, high number of turbines, low minimum turbine spacing and indifferent shape
between circle, diamond and square.
Accompanied by evidence from the case study,
winds that are more concentrated in either uni-direction or bimodal peaks offer the high-
est improvement in annual energy production both in relative and absolute terms. The
separation between the wind peaks are found to not have direct correlation towards the
optimization. Moreover, a lower mean wind speed (lower Weibull A scale parameter) of-
fers a higher relative potential increase in AEP. It is important to note that this relative
AEP improvement potential does not mean the same trend is present in the absolute
increase of AEP, as higher wind speeds always produces more AEP in absolute terms.
From a physical perspective, a lower mean wind speed below rated results in higher thrust
and wake effects, which leads to a better potential improvement as turbines can move to
wake-minimizing positions. In contrast, a wind farm with high wind speeds above rated
experiences pitching and thus have lower thrust and lower wake effects to optimize for.
There is also an artificial bias where for lower mean wind speeds, the initial starting layout
has a lower AEP, which may undermine the effects from the mean wind speed.
Although having a smaller effect, a higher number of turbines and lower minimum turbine
spacing offers a higher potential of improvement given a higher upper bound threshold
and avoids wake effects by packing more turbines perpendicular to the prevailing wind
direction. With that said, if the area of the wind farm is small, a high number of wind
turbines may give the opposite effect, where it makes the wind farm so packed that it is
extremely challenging to find wake-minimizing positions. This opposite effect is seen in
the fixed area case study. In terms of wind farm shape, only limited shapes are tested,
therefore the non-significance can be debated in case of irregular shapes. As an example,
if the shape is a long and wide strip and is just so happens to be perpendicular to the
Page 57 of 64
==PAGE:65==
6.3
Interpretation of Algorithm Behavior
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
prevailing wind, then an initial grid layout would have a very promising improvement
potential. Nonetheless, it is fairly clear that in this study, the most significant prob-
lem characteristic in a WFLO problem is the wind rose resource, while other problem
characteristics have mixed effects that are tangled and must be assessed further.
From the perspective of optimizing parameters, the results are much different. Across
all tested levels of wake models, thrust curve differences and number of wind sectors, no
significance is found throughout the impact analysis. The reason for this is that even
coarse models, such as Jensen wake model, simplified thrust curves and lower number of
wind sectors still provide the same direction of optimization, though at a lower resolu-
tion. The premise is, however, that the layout should be evaluated using an “accurate”
benchmark model at the start and end of the optimization. The implementation will
largely decrease the time for optimization (i.e. using Jensen or Bastankhah wake mod-
els reduces computational time by 2 to 5 times compared to a TurbOPark wake model),
while still providing promising results. Another benefit of such implementation is that
it reduces the more optimistic bias given by coarser models, while keeping the conserva-
tive estimates when the benchmark is applied. There is one notable disadvantage in this
approach, which has been seen in the realistic wind farm case studies of Borssele wind
farm. Under minimal AEP improvement, it makes the optimization vulnerable to errors
introduced by coarse models, occasionally producing layouts that appears to be improved
under the optimization process but worse when re-evaluated with the benchmark. With
that said, this is a rare occurrence and it relates more to the inability of certain algorithms
to optimize layouts eﬀiciently. From the optimizing parameters results, the implications
for WFLO research is that computationally expensive or highly accurate models are not
always necessary for during the optimization process itself.
6.3
Interpretation of Algorithm Behavior
Algorithm behavior is the last significant effect to be discussed, where seven algorithms
have been tested in this study. Across the DOE impact analysis and realistic wind farm
case study, Random Search (RS) consistently achieved the highest or near-highest AEP
improvements. This counterintuitive outcome is surprising, especially given the many
decades of metaheuristic algorithm development. Unlike other algorithms, RS benefits in
one key property, it is completely stochastic and unbiased, making its exploration capa-
bility to be a full coverage of the search space. In the highly complex WFLO landscape
characterized by large flat regions and many narrow ridges of optimality, the ability to
escape local optima is perceived to be a very important feature of a successful algorithm.
A similarly thing happens with LS, where when the wake interactions makes the optimiza-
tion space very shallow, LS’s capability of moving away from the neighboring turbines
Page 58 of 64
==PAGE:66==
6.3
Interpretation of Algorithm Behavior
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
renders successful escape of the local optima. While population-based metaheuristic al-
gorithms gradually contract around an optima, RS and LS have the capability to explore
the full region with a better probability in reaching the best local or global optima. In the
population-based algorithms, ABC performed with the best ability. The reason may be
linked to the stochasticity seen in RS and LS, where in the scout bee phase, it completely
comes up with a new layout after a food source is exhausted. These unbiased features
in RS, LS and ABC, are reflected in the evolution histories, presenting a logarithmic
profile with an eﬀicient increase of AEP improvement compared to other algorithms. De-
spite being stochastic, these algorithms exhibits high robustness in results, showing a low
standard deviation in the impact analysis.
Other population based algorithms, such as CMAES, PSO, MFO and RCGA, are much
more staggered in improvement, and lack in performance and robustness. Their adap-
tive exploitation mechanisms drive the population toward local attractions, which can be
detrimental when the true optimum lies in a narrow region that is rarely sampled once
convergence begins. From the evolution history, it has been seen that PSO, MFO and
RCGA often encounter premature stagnation and insuﬀicient convergence. In the case of
CMAES, the flat regions and narrow optimality ridges of the WFLO objective landscape
provides little informative structure for adapting its multivariate sampling distribution.
As such, these algorithms often rely more heavily on the tuning of parameters, an as-
pect that is not covered in this study. It is therefore proposed that these metaheuristic
algorithms are more suited for exploitation rather than exploration of a general WFLO
problem.
From a statistical point of view, the Mann Whitney U has been implemented in the
impact analysis and realistic wind farm case study, where the same conclusion is made
regarding the best algorithm. With that said, the dominance of superiority is not as
significant, where the top performing RS algorithm “surpasses” 2 out 7 and 21 out of
30 tested cases in the impact analysis and real-wind farm case study respectively. The
higher superiority in the complex case study can be mainly attributed to the lack of
performance from population based algorithms. As such, it is possible to conclude that
even with the best algorithm, it does not triumph in all cases. In other words, it does
not mean that other population-based algorithms cannot perform well in specific cases
or when tuned accordingly. For a general WFLO case, however, it is still suggested that
single-solution based RS and LS should be primarily used for its stability and superior
overall performance.
Page 59 of 64
==PAGE:67==
6.4
Limitations of the Study
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
6.4
Limitations of the Study
A study always comes with various limitations, and these must be addressed accordingly.
Given the complexity of WFLO, a meaningful amount of simplifications and assumptions
have been made to render the benchmarking impact analysis and case studies feasible.
The most significant limitations are therefore addressed in the following paragraphs.
To deconstruct the WFLO problem, many simplifications are made. These include using
only gradient-free algorithms, engineering wake models, and modeling of wind resources
based on idealized Weibull-distributed roses. Depending on the complexity of engineering
wake models, it more or less assumes that wake grows as a function either linearly or with
some turbulence variable. In real-life, high-fidelity LES or RANS is required to completely
capture the atmospheric wake complexity. In the study, the engineering wake models used
covers a suﬀicient range of complexity in engineering wake models development, ranging
from early 1980s all the way to 2020. As such, it is deemed to be enough for the purpose
of the study. Although gradient-based algorithms are generally faster and more eﬀicient,
they are less compatible with the highly non-smooth and multi-modal landscape of WFLO
problems used in this study. As an example, gradients can be ill-conditioned or undefined
when simplified wake models introduce discontinuities or non-differentiable regions, caus-
ing gradient-based methods to converge prematurely or struggle to converge reliably. In
addition, gradient-based algorithms are deterministic for a given starting point, making
them sensitive to the choice of initialization and less suitable for statistical benchmarking.
Idealized weibull-distributed roses neglect seasonal variation, atmospheric stability values,
which makes the wind roses more of an average wind distribution. Additional simplifica-
tions including neglecting exclusion zones, bathymetry influences, cable optimization and
neighboring wind farm wakes are made. Additionally, turbine control strategies such as
derating, peak shaving are also neglected in the optimization. As a result, the optimiza-
tion results of the study are not really directly comparable to real-life wind farm SCADA
data and cannot be verified due to strict NDA requirements with wind farm developers.
With that said, the captured trends due to the tested factors is meaningful and presents
an overall picture on what factors contribute towards the optimization process in a WFLO
problem.
Further, the objective function is restricted to AEP, which bars out many other objectives
such as LCOE that wind farm developer also value. With that said, the main source
of income for wind farm developers is based on the power generated, which makes the
objective function of AEP still one of the most decisive factors in WFLO. It is important
to also note that the relative AEP improvement metric also has its bias, especially when
there is a lower starting point. As an example, one percent starting from a lower initial
value is different than one with a higher initial value. With that said, the discrepancy is
Page 60 of 64
==PAGE:68==
6.4
Limitations of the Study
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
fairly small with the AEP being relatively large numbers, and should not cause a huge
effect towards the results. Due to the difference in number of turbines across the impact
analysis and case studies, the relative AEP improvement is sought to be the most unbiased
metric that can be used.
Statistical and computational budget limitations are also present, where the results from
this study are based on statistical tests with a threshold of p = 0.05 and the computational
budget is set at 10000 number of AEP evaluations per case, regardless of algorithm.
The confidence of the identified trends lies at 95%, making many results in this study a
statistical significant trend, but may or may not (unlikely, but possible) be observed in
real-life, especially given the complexity of such a problem. Rigor of statistical test have
still been examined to the best capability, such as using well-known non-parametric tests
and checking for normality assumptions in effects tests. Moreover, because all algorithms
were restricted to the same computational budget, simpler algorithms (RS, LS) that
converge quickly are advantaged, while population-based algorithms—which often require
far more evaluations to reach stable convergence—are penalized. With that said, this
bias is inherently protected by the notion that all algorithms should be viewed equally. If
simpler algorithms converge quickly and better with the same number of AEP evaluation,
the limitation is justified and practical in this study.
Lastly, it is also important to address several limitations regarding the set-up of the
experiments. Two of the major ones are highlighted here. First, certain categorical factors
in the DOE impact analysis, such as the shape of the wind farm, lacked a quantitative
representation. As a result, the selection of the levels are unconstrained and based on
experience than parameterized descriptors. The proposed wind farm shapes in this study
are fairly simple and idealized with no irregularities, which likely contributed to the non-
significance in the impact analysis. A more robust approach for a future work would be
to quantify the shape through various parameters, such as perimeter, area or scale ratio
(i.e. length to width) etc. Given that the shape aspect ratio directly influences how many
wind turbines become perpendicular to a prevailing wind direction, a more comprehensive
investigation into shape-related impacts on WFLO is warranted. Second, is in the wind
rose case study, the parameters κ, µ and ω are varied simultaneously to generate diverse
directional distributions. Unlike traditional one-factor-at-a-time experiment, the aim of
the wind rose case study is to explore a broad spectrum of realistic wind roses rather
than isolate individual effects. While the results clearly show that the weighted wind
concentration of the wind peak is a significant driver of AEP improvement, this set up
does not rule out the influence of other components, such as directional weight alone
or angular separation of the peaks do not have a certain effect.
The reason is that
although these variables showed no clear correlation overall, the individual contributions
Page 61 of 64
==PAGE:69==
6.4
Limitations of the Study
6
GENERAL DISCUSSION
effects cannot be separated under simultaneous variation. This coupling of parameters is
therefore a structural limitation of the experimental design.
Understanding these limitation do not necessarily undermine the findings, but contextu-
alizes them within a controlled setting, allowing for more accurate replications. These
limitations also highlights the opportunities for future work to incorporate more complex
benchmarking testing, which include but are not limited to include additional higher-
fidelity physics, real-site constraints and broader objective formulations.
Page 62 of 64
==PAGE:70==
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RECOMMENDATION
7
Conclusion and Future Recommendation
This thesis set out to disentangle the relevant influences of problem characteristics, mod-
eling parameters, and algorithmic design choices on the performance of wind farm layout
optimizations. The work sets the standard for a systematic benchmark impact analysis
through a system design of experiments (DOE) framework combined with statistical anal-
ysis and reinforced with case studies. It aims to clarify when optimization is worthwhile,
what factors truly shape optimization outcome potentials, and how different algorithms
behave with various wind farm settings.
Across all experiments, the problem characteristics detailing the wind resource - partic-
ularly wind rose type and Weibull scale parameter A (mean wind speed) - were found
to have the largest effect and governs the range of the achievable improvement in AEP.
These two factors consistently influenced optimization improvement more strongly than
other problem characteristics such as number of wind turbines and minimum wind farm
spacing. Algorithm choice is also found to be strongly significant, especially in achiev-
ing the potential improvement of AEP. From analysis, it shows that the potential for
optimization is constrained by the inherent structure of the wind field. When the wind
field is highly monotonic or the algorithm is not suited, little room for improvement is
seen regardless of changing other optimizing parameters, algorithm choice or problem
characteristics. Thus, although problem characteristics dominate the potential in AEP
improvement, the optimizer determines how much of that potential is actually realized.
The study also demonstrated an interesting discovery, and that is simpler models and
algorithms can be at bar or more effective compared to more complex formulations. In
a multitude of cases, given the same optimization budget, Random Search achieved the
best results, driven by its unbiased completely stochastic exploration of the design space.
Similarly, coarse engineering wake models, simplified thrust curves, and reduced sector
resolutions were found to perform just as well for guiding the optimization process, pro-
vided that the final layouts are evaluated using the benchmark model. These findings alter
the common assumptions that high-fidelity physics or complex metaheuristics is required
to obtain meaningful optimization processes.
Overall, the thesis contributes to a structured and quantitative understanding of the in-
fluencing factors and provides a reproducible methodology framework for WFLO. One
of the major takeaways from the research is that the improvement potential of WFLO
is fundamentally a wind-resource driven problem aided by algorithm choice. Wind-rose
structure, Weibull scale parameter A, number of turbines, and minimum spacing dic-
tate the achievable improvement ceiling, while algorithm selection becomes important
based on these characteristics. In other words, a good algorithmic performance cannot
Page 63 of 64
==PAGE:71==
7
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RECOMMENDATION
compensate for an inherently limited potential WFLO problem, but poor algorithmic
performance can significantly undermine a WFLO problem with large optimization po-
tential. Recognizing such discrepancy hopefully helps researchers in shifting away from
purely “algorithm competitions” and instead allocating resources in more sophisticated
standardizing benchmarking, problem classification, and scenario dependent algorithm
selection, fully maximizing the potential of WFLO.
To conclude the thesis, a few recommendation for future work are suggested for further
analysis. Although it is found that coarser models are also satisfactory in the optimiza-
tion process, future studies would still benefit from including additional higher-fidelity
physics in the benchmark to gain a more realistic representation of AEP. Comparing en-
gineering wake models with RANS or LES across the same optimization tasks would help
quantifying the robustness of algorithm behavior under more realistic flow conditions.
Additionally, an expansion to quantify irregular and constraint-heavy domains is sug-
gested. Real offshore and onshore wind farms often contain multiple exclusion zones,
which may be because of irregular terrain conditions, cable-routing constraints or envi-
ronmental reasons. Extending the DOE framework so that constraints can be quantified
would provide a more complete picture of algorithm behavior under industry-relevant
layouts. Additionally, since wind turbines are pushed towards the boundary constraints,
proposing a way to quantify the boundary (i.e. possibly as a ratio between area and
perimeter) is a plausible way to further explore the effects from different shapes of a wind
farm.
Multi-objective formulations and designing more complex DOE with interaction effects
could also provide new insights into the trade-offs of WFLO problems. While this thesis
focused solely on AEP, real developments require balancing energy production with all
sorts of costs, including cable and fatigue. Multi-objective optimization methods and
having more complex DOE could offer insights into trade-offs of objectives and mixed
factors interactions not captured by the current study.
Finally, the surprising strength of Random Search suggests that stochastic algorithms
maintains broad exploration throughout the optimization process.
As, such targeted
hybrid strategies that combines stochastic exploration and metaheuristic exploitations
may be an interesting topic to dig deeper into.
In summary, future research should mainly focus on increasing the link between opti-
mization behavior and its relevant trade-offs through an increase in physical realism and
multi-objective formulation. These extensions would help deepen the understanding of
WFLO behavior and enhance its practical relevance in commercial wind-farm design op-
timization.
Page 64 of 64
==PAGE:72==
References
[1]
“Wind power generation,” Our World in Data. (2024), [Online]. Available: https:
//ourworldindata.org/grapher/wind-generation?tab=line&time=earliest.
.2024 (visited on 11/16/2025).
[2]
“Global Electricity Review 2024 | Ember.” (2024), [Online]. Available: https://
ember- energy.org/latest- insights/global- electricity- review- 2024/
global-electricity-trends/ (visited on 11/16/2025).
[3]
G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B. Diviacco, “Optimization of wind turbine positioning
in large windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm,” Journal of Wind Engineering
and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 105–116, Jan. 1994, issn: 01676105.
doi: 10.1016/0167-6105(94)90080-9. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0167610594900809 (visited on 06/13/2025).
[4]
J. F. Herbert-Acero, O. Probst, P.-E. Réthoré, G. C. Larsen, and K. K. Castillo-
Villar, “A review of methodological approaches for the design and optimization of
wind farms,” Energies, vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 6930–7016, 11 Nov. 2014, issn: 1996-1073.
doi: 10.3390/en7116930. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-
1073/7/11/6930 (visited on 06/06/2025).
[5]
N. Jensen, “A note on wind generator interaction,” Risø National Laboratory,
Roskilde, Report 87-550-0971-9, 1983.
[6]
M. Bastankhah and F. Porté-Agel, “A new analytical model for wind-turbine wakes,”
Renewable Energy, Special Issue on Aerodynamics of Offshore Wind Energy Sys-
tems and Wakes, vol. 70, pp. 116–123, Oct. 1, 2014, issn: 0960-1481. doi: 10.1016/
j.renene.2014.01.002. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960148114000317 (visited on 10/27/2025).
[7]
N. F. Baker, A. P. Stanley, J. J. Thomas, A. Ning, and K. Dykes, “Best Prac-
tices for Wake Model and Optimization Algorithm Selection in Wind Farm Layout
Optimization,” in AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum, San Diego, CA, Jan. 7, 2019. doi:
10.2514/6.2019-0540. [Online]. Available: https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/10.
2514/6.2019-0540.
[8]
R. Brogna, J. Feng, J. N. Sørensen, W. Z. Shen, and F. Porté-Agel, “A new wake
model and comparison of eight algorithms for layout optimization of wind farms in
complex terrain,” Applied Energy, vol. 259, p. 114 189, Feb. 2020, issn: 03062619.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114189. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0306261919318768.
[9]
T. Kunakote, N. Sabangban, S. Kumar, et al., “Comparative Performance of Twelve
Metaheuristics for Wind Farm Layout Optimisation,” Archives of Computational
Methods in Engineering, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 717–730, Jan. 2022, issn: 1134-3060,
Page I of X
==PAGE:73==
1886-1784. doi: 10.1007/s11831-021-09586-7. [Online]. Available: https://
link.springer.com/10.1007/s11831-021-09586-7.
[10]
D. H. Wolpert and W. G. Macready, “No free lunch theorems for optimization,”
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 67–82, 1997.
doi: 10.1109/4235.585893.
[11]
J. J. Thomas, N. F. Baker, P. Malisani, et al., “A comparison of eight optimization
methods applied to a wind farm layout optimization problem,” Wind Energy Sci-
ence, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 865–891, Jun. 1, 2023, issn: 2366-7451. doi: 10.5194/wes-
8-865-2023. [Online]. Available: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/8/
865/2023/.
[12]
J. Feng and W. Z. Shen, “Solving the wind farm layout optimization problem using
random search algorithm,” Renewable Energy, vol. 78, pp. 182–192, Jun. 2015, issn:
09601481. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2015.01.005. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0960148115000129.
[13]
M. Wagner, J. Day, and F. Neumann, “A fast and effective local search algorithm for
optimizing the placement of wind turbines,” Renewable Energy, vol. 51, pp. 64–70,
Mar. 2013, issn: 0960-1481. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2012.09.008. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0960148112005745
(visited on 07/10/2025).
[14]
S. Mirjalili, “Moth-flame optimization algorithm: A novel nature-inspired heuris-
tic paradigm,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 89, pp. 228–249, Nov. 2015, issn:
0950-7051. doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2015.07.006. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0950705115002580 (visited on
07/10/2025).
[15]
N. Hansen, S. D. Müller, and P. Koumoutsakos, “Reducing the Time Complex-
ity of the Derandomized Evolution Strategy with Covariance Matrix Adaptation
(CMA-ES),” Evolutionary Computation, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2003, issn:
1063-6560. doi: 10 . 1162 / 106365603321828970. [Online]. Available: https : / /
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6790790 (visited on 10/23/2025).
[16]
N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier, “Completely Derandomized Self-Adaptation in Evo-
lution Strategies,” Evolutionary Computation, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 159–195, Jun. 2001,
issn: 1063-6560. doi: 10.1162/106365601750190398. [Online]. Available: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6790628 (visited on 10/26/2025).
[17]
D. Karaboga and B. Basturk, “A powerful and eﬀicient algorithm for numerical
function optimization: Artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm,” Journal of Global
Optimization, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 459–471, Nov. 1, 2007, issn: 1573-2916. doi: 10.
1007/s10898- 007- 9149- x. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10898-007-9149-x (visited on 08/21/2025).
Page II of X
==PAGE:74==
[18]
Y.-C. Chuang, C.-T. Chen, and C. Hwang, “A simple and eﬀicient real-coded genetic
algorithm for constrained optimization,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 38, pp. 87–
105, Jan. 2016, issn: 15684946. doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2015.09.036. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1568494615006080
(visited on 08/15/2025).
[19]
J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proceedings of
ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4, Nov. 1995, 1942–
1948 vol.4. doi: 10 . 1109 / ICNN . 1995 . 488968. [Online]. Available: https : / /
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/488968 (visited on 08/11/2025).
[20]
S. Chowdhury, J. Zhang, A. Messac, and L. Castillo, “Unrestricted wind farm layout
optimization (UWFLO): Investigating key factors influencing the maximum power
generation,” Renewable Energy, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 16–30, Feb. 1, 2012, issn: 0960-
1481. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . renene . 2011 . 06 . 033. [Online]. Available: https : / /
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148111003260 (visited on
10/25/2025).
[21]
J. G. Pedersen, E. Svensson, L. Poulsen, and N. G. Nygaard, “Turbulence Optimized
Park model with Gaussian wake profile,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
vol. 2265, no. 2, p. 022 063, May 2022, issn: 1742-6596. doi: 10 . 1088 / 1742 -
6596/2265/2/022063. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-
6596/2265/2/022063 (visited on 10/27/2025).
[22]
M. M. Pedersen, A. M. Forsting, P. van der Laan, et al., Pywake 2.5.0: An open-
source wind farm simulation tool, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://gitlab.
windenergy.dtu.dk/TOPFARM/PyWake.
[23]
I. Katic, J. Højstrup, and N. Jensen, “A Simple Model for Cluster Eﬀiciency: Eu-
ropean Wind Energy Association Conference and Exhibition,” EWEC’86. Proceed-
ings. Vol. 1, W. Palz and E. Sesto, Eds., pp. 407–410, 1987.
[24]
N. G. Nygaard, L. Poulsen, E. Svensson, and J. G. Pedersen, “Large-scale bench-
marking of wake models for offshore wind farms,” Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, vol. 2265, no. 2, p. 022 008, May 2022, issn: 1742-6596. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/2265/2/022008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-
6596/2265/2/022008 (visited on 10/28/2025).
[25]
D. C. Montgomery, Design and Analysis of Experiments, 10th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, 2020, isbn: 978-1-119-49244-3.
[26]
JMP Statistical Discovery LLC, Jmp, version 18, Cary, NC, USA: SAS Institute
Inc., 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.jmp.com.
[27]
E. Gaertner, J. Rinker, L. Sethuraman, et al., Definition of the IEA 15-Megawatt
Offshore Reference Wind Turbine, English. National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL), 2020.
Page III of X
==PAGE:75==
[28]
J. Feng and J. N. Sørensen, “Towards a general tool chain integration platform for
multi-disciplinary analysis and optimization in wind energy,” Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, vol. 2767, no. 8, p. 082 014, Jun. 1, 2024, issn: 1742-6588, 1742-
6596. doi: 10.1088/1742- 6596/2767/8/082014. [Online]. Available: https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/2767/8/082014.
[29]
International Electrotechnical Commission, “Iec 61400-1: Wind energy generation
systems –part 1: Design requirements,” International Electrotechnical Commission,
Geneva, Switzerland, Standard IEC 61400-1:2019, 2019.
[30]
M. M. Pedersen, M. Friis-Møller, P.-E. Réthoré, et al., Dtuwindenergy/topfarm2:
Release of v2.6.1, version v2.6.1, Nov. 2025. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.17540961.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17540961.
[31]
“Optimality Criteria.” (2024), [Online]. Available: https://www.jmp.com/support/
help/en/18.1/index.shtml#page/jmp/optimality-criteria.shtml (visited on
11/02/2025).
[32]
H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney, “On a Test of Whether one of Two Random
Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other,” The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 50–60, Mar. 1947, issn: 0003-4851, 2168-8990. doi:
10.1214/aoms/1177730491. [Online]. Available: https://projecteuclid.org/
journals/annals-of-mathematical-statistics/volume-18/issue-1/On-a-
Test-of-Whether-one-of-Two-Random-Variables/10.1214/aoms/1177730491.
full (visited on 11/16/2025).
[33]
“Row Diagnostics.” (2024), [Online]. Available: https://www.jmp.com/support/
help/en/17.2/#page/jmp/row- diagnostics.shtml#ww1673660 (visited on
11/05/2025).
[34]
Z. Liang and H. Liu, “Layout Optimization Algorithms for the Offshore Wind
Farm with Different Densities Using a Full-Field Wake Model,” Energies, vol. 16,
no. 16, p. 5916, 16 Aug. 10, 2023, issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en16165916.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/16/16/5916 (visited on
06/05/2025).
[35]
N. Masseran, A. M. Razali, K. Ibrahim, and M. T. Latif, “Fitting a mixture of
von Mises distributions in order to model data on wind direction in Peninsular
Malaysia,” Energy Conversion and Management, The III. International Confer-
ence on Nuclear and Renewable Energy Resources NURER2012, vol. 72, pp. 94–
102, Aug. 1, 2013, issn: 0196-8904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2012.11.025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0196890413001301 (visited on 11/16/2025).
[36]
J. A. Carta, C. Bueno, and P. Ramírez, “Statistical modelling of directional wind
speeds using mixtures of von Mises distributions: Case study,” Energy Conver-
Page IV of X
==PAGE:76==
sion and Management, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 897–907, May 1, 2008, issn: 0196-8904.
doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2007.10.017. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0196890407003767 (visited on
11/16/2025).
[37]
“FAIR data / WindData Revamp / WindData Documentation ·GitLab,” GitLab.
(Aug. 25, 2022), [Online]. Available: https://gitlab.windenergy.dtu.dk/fair-
data/winddata-revamp/winddata-documentation (visited on 11/16/2025).
[38]
J. W. Wagenaar and P. J. Eecen, “Measurements of Wind, Wave and Currents at the
Offshore Wind Farm Egmond aan Zee,” Energy Research Center of the Netherlands,
2009.
[39]
“IEA37_Borssele_Wind_Resource.yaml,” GitHub. (2023), [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/kilojoules/CablingExperiments/blob/master/IEA37_Borssele_
Wind_Resource.yaml (visited on 11/16/2025).
[40]
N. N. Davis, J. Badger, A. N. Hahmann, et al., “The Global Wind Atlas: A High-
Resolution Dataset of Climatologies and Associated Web-Based Application,” Bul-
letin of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 104, no. 8, E1507–E1525, Aug. 21,
2023, issn: 0003-0007, 1520-0477. doi: 10.1175/BAMS-D-21-0075.1. [Online].
Available: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/bams/104/8/BAMS-
D-21-0075.1.xml (visited on 11/16/2025).
[41]
NREL, “FLORIS. version 4.2.1,” GitHub repository, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/NREL/floris.
[42]
DTU Wind Energy, Wasp: Wind atlas analysis and application program, version 12,
Roskilde, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.wasp.dk.
Page V of X
==PAGE:77==
Appendix
7.1
DOE Test Cases
Table 7.1: DOE test cases (1–56).
Case
#WT
Weibull A
Spacing
Wind Rose
Wake Model
Shape
CT Curve
#Sectors
Algorithm
[m/s]
(dmin) [D]
1
16
7.5
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Square
Normal
360
MFO
2
16
8.5
3
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
72
ABC
3
16
8.5
4
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Constant
12
ABC
4
16
10.0
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Constant
72
RS
5
16
7.5
4
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Constant
360
RCGA
6
16
8.5
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
72
CMAES
7
16
10.0
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
72
RCGA
8
16
8.5
4
Bimodal
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
12
RS
9
16
10.0
4
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Simplified
360
ABC
10
16
10.0
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
12
RCGA
11
16
8.5
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
360
ABC
12
16
8.5
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
12
PSO
13
16
10.0
4
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Normal
360
RCGA
14
16
8.5
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
12
LS
15
16
10.0
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
360
CMAES
16
16
10.0
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
72
RS
17
16
7.5
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
360
RS
18
16
7.5
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Constant
12
MFO
19
16
10.0
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
360
RS
20
16
8.5
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
12
PSO
21
16
8.5
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
12
RCGA
22
16
10.0
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Normal
72
PSO
23
16
7.5
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
12
PSO
24
16
7.5
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Normal
12
RCGA
25
16
8.5
3
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Normal
72
PSO
26
16
7.5
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
360
LS
27
16
7.5
4
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
12
ABC
28
16
7.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Constant
12
CMAES
29
16
8.5
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
72
MFO
30
16
7.5
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
72
CMAES
31
16
8.5
3
Uniform
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
72
LS
32
16
7.5
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
72
RCGA
33
16
7.5
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
12
LS
34
16
8.5
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Square
Constant
360
MFO
35
16
10.0
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
12
CMAES
36
16
10.0
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Square
Normal
12
ABC
37
16
8.5
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
12
CMAES
38
16
10.0
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
12
RS
39
16
10.0
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
360
ABC
40
16
10.0
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
360
RCGA
41
16
8.5
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
360
RS
42
16
7.5
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
12
MFO
43
16
7.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Normal
360
PSO
44
16
7.5
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
12
CMAES
45
16
8.5
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
360
LS
46
16
8.5
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
360
MFO
47
16
8.5
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
72
LS
48
16
10.0
4
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Simplified
72
MFO
49
16
7.5
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
72
ABC
50
16
7.5
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
72
MFO
51
16
10.0
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
72
LS
52
16
7.5
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
72
RS
53
16
7.5
3
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
360
CMAES
54
16
10.0
3
Uniform
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
360
PSO
55
16
8.5
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
360
PSO
56
16
10.0
5
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Constant
72
LS
Page VI of X
==PAGE:78==
Table 7.2: DOE test cases (57–112).
Case
#WT
Weibull A
Spacing
Wind Rose
Wake Model
Shape
CT Curve
#Sectors
Algorithm
[m/s]
(dmin) [D]
57
25
8.5
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
72
MFO
58
25
10.0
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Normal
12
MFO
59
25
7.5
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
12
PSO
60
25
7.5
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
360
RS
61
25
7.5
5
Uniform
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
360
CMAES
62
25
8.5
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
360
RCGA
63
25
10.0
3
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
12
CMAES
64
25
7.5
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
12
ABC
65
25
10.0
4
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Circle
Constant
360
CMAES
66
25
8.5
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
360
ABC
67
25
7.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Constant
72
RS
68
25
10.0
5
Uniform
Jensen
Diamond
Normal
360
RS
69
25
7.5
5
Uniform
Jensen
Diamond
Normal
72
ABC
70
25
8.5
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Constant
360
PSO
71
25
7.5
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
12
LS
72
25
10.0
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
72
ABC
73
25
8.5
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Normal
12
LS
74
25
8.5
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Square
Constant
72
CMAES
75
25
7.5
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
360
RCGA
76
25
7.5
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
360
LS
77
25
7.5
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
360
MFO
78
25
7.5
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Normal
12
RS
79
25
10.0
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
72
CMAES
80
25
10.0
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
12
MFO
81
25
8.5
4
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
360
MFO
82
25
8.5
3
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Constant
12
CMAES
83
25
10.0
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
360
RCGA
84
25
10.0
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Circle
Constant
12
PSO
85
25
8.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Simplified
360
LS
86
25
8.5
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Normal
12
RS
87
25
7.5
3
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
72
RS
88
25
8.5
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
360
LS
89
25
8.5
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
360
PSO
90
25
7.5
4
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
72
LS
91
25
7.5
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Simplified
72
CMAES
92
25
8.5
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
12
ABC
93
25
10.0
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
72
CMAES
94
25
10.0
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
12
PSO
95
25
8.5
5
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
360
ABC
96
25
8.5
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
12
RS
97
25
7.5
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
12
RCGA
98
25
7.5
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Constant
72
PSO
99
25
10.0
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
72
ABC
100
25
7.5
4
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Simplified
72
LS
101
25
10.0
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
360
MFO
102
25
10.0
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Constant
72
MFO
103
25
10.0
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
12
PSO
104
25
10.0
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
72
LS
105
25
10.0
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Constant
12
RCGA
106
25
8.5
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
12
MFO
107
25
7.5
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Square
Normal
72
RCGA
108
25
8.5
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Square
Constant
360
RS
109
25
10.0
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
72
RCGA
110
25
8.5
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
72
PSO
111
25
8.5
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
72
RCGA
112
25
10.0
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
12
ABC
Page VII of X
==PAGE:79==
Table 7.3: DOE test cases (113–168).
Case
#WT
Weibull A
Spacing
Wind Rose
Wake Model
Shape
CT Curve
#Sectors
Algorithm
[m/s]
(dmin) [D]
113
36
7.5
3
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
72
PSO
114
36
10.0
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
360
LS
115
36
8.5
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Normal
360
CMAES
116
36
8.5
5
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Normal
72
PSO
117
36
10.0
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
12
CMAES
118
36
10.0
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
72
MFO
119
36
10.0
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Normal
72
LS
120
36
8.5
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
360
MFO
121
36
7.5
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
72
ABC
122
36
10.0
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
72
RS
123
36
7.5
4
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
12
MFO
124
36
10.0
4
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Constant
72
MFO
125
36
10.0
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Normal
360
CMAES
126
36
8.5
5
Unidirection
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
72
ABC
127
36
10.0
3
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
360
RS
128
36
10.0
4
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
360
ABC
129
36
8.5
3
Uniform
Jensen
Diamond
Normal
12
RCGA
130
36
10.0
4
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
12
LS
131
36
7.5
5
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
12
RS
132
36
7.5
5
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
360
RS
133
36
7.5
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Square
Simplified
72
RCGA
134
36
7.5
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Constant
360
LS
135
36
8.5
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Square
Normal
12
CMAES
136
36
8.5
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Diamond
Simplified
12
RCGA
137
36
7.5
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
360
CMAES
138
36
7.5
5
Unidirection
TurbOPark
Diamond
Constant
360
PSO
139
36
7.5
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Constant
360
RCGA
140
36
10.0
4
Uniform
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
360
PSO
141
36
7.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Normal
360
ABC
142
36
10.0
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Square
Normal
360
MFO
143
36
10.0
3
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
360
RCGA
144
36
10.0
3
Uniform
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
12
RS
145
36
8.5
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Circle
Normal
72
RCGA
146
36
7.5
3
Uniform
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
72
PSO
147
36
8.5
3
Uniform
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
72
MFO
148
36
8.5
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Normal
12
RS
149
36
8.5
5
Uniform
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
12
RCGA
150
36
7.5
3
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Constant
12
ABC
151
36
8.5
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Simplified
72
RCGA
152
36
7.5
3
Uniform
Bastankhah
Diamond
Normal
12
MFO
153
36
8.5
5
Uniform
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
360
ABC
154
36
7.5
3
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Square
Constant
12
MFO
155
36
8.5
5
Bimodal
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
12
LS
156
36
10.0
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Square
Simplified
12
LS
157
36
8.5
4
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Diamond
Constant
72
CMAES
158
36
7.5
4
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Normal
360
LS
159
36
7.5
5
Unidirection
Bastankhah
Square
Simplified
360
CMAES
160
36
8.5
4
Uniform
Jensen
Square
Normal
72
RS
161
36
10.0
5
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Constant
12
LS
162
36
8.5
3
Bimodal
Jensen
Diamond
Simplified
72
CMAES
163
36
10.0
3
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Square
Simplified
12
PSO
164
36
10.0
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Diamond
Simplified
360
PSO
165
36
10.0
3
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Constant
72
ABC
166
36
7.5
4
Unidirection
Jensen
Circle
Normal
12
ABC
167
36
8.5
4
Bimodal
TurbOPark
Circle
Simplified
72
RS
168
36
7.5
3
Uniform
Jensen
Circle
Constant
72
PSO
Page VIII of X
==PAGE:80==
7.2
Effects Test (using Max AEP)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
AEP Increase Max [%] Actual
0
5
10
15
AEP Increase Max [%] Predicted 
RMSE=1.1911 RSq=0.87 PValue=<.0001
Figure 7.1: Actual vs. Prediction plot using Max AEP increase [%] to fit the model
-6
-2
2
6
Studentized 
Residual
0
50
100
150
DOE Case Number
Figure 7.2: Studentized Residuals using Max AEP increase [%] to fit the model
Table 7.4: Effect tests from ANOVA results based on max AEP increase and ranked by
sum of squares. Factors in bold are significant.
Factors
DoF
Sum of Squares
F-Ratio
p-value
Wind Rose Type
2
916.8207
323.1371
< .0001
Weibull A
1
334.2566
235.6201
< .0001
No. of Turbines
1
72.6230
51.1932
< .0001
Algorithm
6
70.9306
8.3333
< .0001
Minimum Wind Farm Spacing
1
13.7108
9.6648
0.0023
Shape Wind Farm
2
13.4227
4.7309
0.0102
No. of Wind Rose Sector
1
2.6050
1.8363
0.1774
Wake Model
2
1.4260
0.5026
0.6060
Thrust Curve
2
0.1004
0.0354
0.9652
Page IX of X
==PAGE:81==
7.3
Realistic Wind Farm Algorithm
Table 7.5: Weibull parameters (A, k) and frequency distribution per sector for all wind
farms
Sector [°]
Horns Rev 1
Lillgrund
OWEZ
Borssele
RS2
A [m/s]
k
f [%]
A [m/s]
k
f [%]
A [m/s]
k
f [%]
A [m/s]
k
f [%]
A [m/s]
k
f [%]
[0, 30)
9.18
2.39
3.6
4.50
1.69
3.8
10.16
2.20
6.9
9.08
2.22
6.7
7.10
2.41
3.7
[30, 60)
9.78
2.45
3.9
4.70
1.78
4.5
9.60
2.20
5.9
9.30
2.26
7.6
7.30
2.95
2.8
[60, 90)
9.53
2.41
5.2
3.00
1.82
0.4
9.71
2.20
6.4
9.18
2.28
7.4
9.50
2.56
5.5
[90, 120)
9.91
2.59
7.0
7.20
1.70
2.8
9.82
2.20
7.4
8.89
2.28
6.5
9.90
2.99
9.1
[120, 150)
10.04
2.76
8.4
8.80
1.97
8.3
9.60
2.20
4.3
8.13
2.15
4.7
9.30
3.00
8.7
[150, 180)
9.59
2.60
6.4
8.20
2.49
7.5
9.26
2.20
4.8
8.76
2.11
4.6
8.70
3.01
6.1
[180, 210)
9.58
2.58
8.6
8.40
2.72
9.9
10.28
2.20
6.9
11.38
2.13
7.7
9.10
2.58
6.4
[210, 240)
10.51
2.55
11.8
9.50
2.70
14.8
11.29
2.20
13.8
12.58
2.29
12.2
10.50
3.04
11.4
[240, 270)
11.40
2.47
15.2
9.20
2.88
14.3
13.55
2.20
16.0
12.74
2.43
19.1
11.40
3.07
13.6
[270, 300)
11.69
2.61
14.7
9.90
3.34
17.0
11.86
2.20
10.6
10.80
2.09
10.1
11.00
2.62
15.3
[300, 330)
11.64
2.63
10.0
10.30
2.84
12.6
10.84
2.20
9.6
9.76
2.01
6.9
10.20
2.71
11.6
[330, 360)
10.09
2.33
5.2
6.70
2.23
4.1
10.61
2.20
7.4
9.63
2.01
6.4
7.80
2.32
5.8
Table 7.6: Summary of algorithm performance across wind farms.
Wind Farm
Algorithm
AEP impr,bench [%]
σAEPimpr,bench [%]
∆AEP impr,bench [GWh]
σ∆AEPimpr,bench [GWh]
Mean CPU Time [h]
HornsRev1
RS
0.83
0.098
5.38
0.64
4.18
HornsRev1
LS
0.502
0.081
3.26
0.53
4.27
HornsRev1
ABC
0.617
0.12
4.00
0.78
4.23
HornsRev1
MFO
0.274
0.029
1.78
0.19
4.32
HornsRev1
CMAES
0.003
0.00
0.02
0.00
4.11
HornsRev1
PSO
0.367
0.082
2.38
0.53
3.80
HornsRev1
RCGA
0.085
0.024
0.55
0.15
4.31
Lillgrund
RS
2.245
0.087
6.81
0.26
1.08
Lillgrund
LS
2.097
0.038
6.36
0.12
1.34
Lillgrund
ABC
1.987
0.14
6.03
0.43
1.60
Lillgrund
MFO
1.262
0.137
3.83
0.42
1.40
Lillgrund
CMAES
0.063
0.026
0.19
0.08
1.54
Lillgrund
PSO
0.915
0.125
2.78
0.38
1.47
Lillgrund
RCGA
0.592
0.138
1.80
0.42
1.41
OWEZ
RS
0.408
0.029
1.65
0.12
0.88
OWEZ
LS
0.364
0.019
1.47
0.08
0.90
OWEZ
ABC
0.390
0.037
1.58
0.15
0.78
OWEZ
MFO
0.302
0.037
1.22
0.15
0.99
OWEZ
CMAES
0.044
0.016
0.18
0.07
0.89
OWEZ
PSO
0.303
0.034
1.23
0.14
0.91
OWEZ
RCGA
0.050
0.053
0.20
0.21
0.91
Borssele
RS
0.472
0.906
15.84
30.43
3.81
Borssele
LS
0.274
0.527
9.20
17.72
3.63
Borssele
ABC
0.472
0.111
15.85
3.74
4.00
Borssele
MFO
-0.017
0.126
-0.56
4.23
4.97
Borssele
CMAES
0.221
0.042
7.41
1.40
3.97
Borssele
PSO
-0.057
0.084
-1.93
2.82
3.60
Borssele
RCGA
-0.033
0.030
-1.10
1.00
1.73
RS2
RS
0.481
0.043
4.05
0.36
4.57
RS2
LS
0.439
0.035
3.70
0.30
4.73
RS2
ABC
0.438
0.042
3.69
0.35
4.75
RS2
MFO
0.086
0.043
0.72
0.36
4.89
RS2
CMAES
0.002
0.00
0.02
0.00
4.34
RS2
PSO
0.042
0.066
0.36
0.55
4.74
RS2
RCGA
-0.010
0.037
-0.08
0.31
4.31
Page X of X
