==PAGE:1==
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simu­
lation for Believable Collaborative AI
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
Master Thesis
December, 2025
By
Markéta Tranberg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Algorithms, Logic and
Graphs, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering.
The thesis was carried out under supervision of Thomas Bolander. I would hereby like to
thank Thomas Bolander for his help and support throughout the course of this project.
I would like to thank my husband for his consistent support throughout the duration of
my studies, especially the thesis; and my friends who helped me with gathering data and
evaluation of my algorithm.
Markéta Tranberg ­ s240395
Signature
Date
ii
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The evolution of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has historically prioritized competitive domi­
nance in zero­sum games. However, modern cooperative environments, like board game
Magic Maze require a paradigm shift toward collaborative teamwork. This thesis explores
the design of ”believable” AI agents capable of navigating a high­dimensional state space
(1031) under strict communication constraints, where success depends on interpreting
non­verbal cues rather than pure individual optimization.
Using a hierarchical planning approach, the global search problem was decomposed into
local sub­goals. Strategic execution was then managed through search trees, utilizing
a modified A* algorithm to generate optimal paths and forward induction to rationalize
teammate actions and re­evaluate the search tree upon receiving new information. To
achieve collaborative believability, twelve behavioural variables were derived from human
gameplay analysis to create three distinct player types: Short Fuse, Basic, and Reactive.
Results demonstrate that heterogeneous teams of diverse player types outperform homo­
geneous ones, achieving a 90% win rate. In a behavioural Turing Test, humans failed to
distinguish AI from human gameplay with significant confidence and 43.4% of responses
were incorrectly identified. Participants attributed human sensations, such as ”panic” and
”confusion” to AI agents, validating the modelled behavioural variables. This work proves
that a hybrid approach combining tree­based search with human­centric behavioural sim­
ulation can produce agents that are both strategically effective and virtually unrecogniz­
able from human players.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Magic Maze
3
2.1
Game description and rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Search problem framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Choice of algorithms
15
3.1
Plan generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Plan execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Player types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Experiments
33
4.1
Objective performance test: Game simulations win rate
. . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Objective performance test: Game aspects statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Subjective performance test: Human or AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Conclusion and Discussions
45
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Bibliography
48
A Human game observation records
49
A.1 Game 01
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.2 Game 02
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.3 Game 03
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.4 Game 04
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.5 Game 05
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.6 Game 06
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.7 Game 07
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.8 Game 08
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.9 Game 09
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
B Human game transcription box plots
55
C Explorative questionnaire results
58
D Questionnaire answers: Human or AI
64
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has seen a significant increase in publications in the
last two decades. Historically, the focus of AI has been zero­sum, perfect­information
games such as IBM’s Deep Blue for the game of chess and Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo
for Go [1]. In context of the traditional AI, the agent is maximizing their own utility through
exhaustive search to find a superior strategy, ultimately rendering human intuition obso­
lete.
As the field of AI matures, the focus changes and broadens to include others than ad­
versarial zero­sum environments. The world of board games has seen an increase in
cooperative board games where the goal is not to defeat the opponent but rather to work
together to achieve a shared goal. This transition creates an opportunity for a different
type of AI agents than pure optimization algorithms. [2]. In games like Magic Maze, the
problem shifts from individual search to team­based coordination. Here, even finding the
optimal solution as an individual does not solve the game, as the goal condition requires
cooperation of all players. This cooperation requires the accommodation to the imperfect
and often unpredictable workflow of humans.
Magic Maze introduces a list of challenges featuring high­dimensional state space, real­
time execution, time constraint, but most notably strictly limited communication between
players. Magic Maze limits the communication to a use of a single non­verbal ”Do some­
thing” token that the agents must rely on for signalling intent to other players. Then, the
success of the team depends not only on the ability of each agent to find a solution to the
tree­based search problem in real­time, but also to interpret these non­verbal cues of the
team and appropriately adjust their strategy.
For an AI agent to become a viable collaborator in a board game setting, it must move
beyond pure logic to incorporate human behaviour features. An agent that plays with
perfect efficiency and pathfinding accuracy often breaks the social flow of a human team,
resulting in being perceived as alien and unpredictable to the other teammates. To bridge
this problem in incoordination, agents must exhibit recognizable human qualities, such as
personality or rage [3]. In the context of AI for board games, collaborative believability
builds on the necessity to trust and understand the other players and their intentions in
order to win the game. A successful collaborative algorithm must then balance the task
success with a level of human­like errors and behavioural tendencies.
The purpose of this thesis is to design and evaluate AI agents that balance task suc­
cess with human­like believability in the context of Magic Maze. We will also analyse the
complexity of the game Magic Maze to identify the appropriate algorithms for the search
problem. The techniques we will discuss include search trees implementing hierarchi­
cal planning through goal decomposition, path finding with a modified A* algorithm, utility
functions for sub­goal prioritization, public announcements with limited information as a
form of communication and forward induction for tree re­computation upon receiving new
information. This work also includes definition of player types characterized by a unique
combination of behavioural variables based on observed and analysed human behaviour.
These player types are then experimented with and evaluated for their ability to win the
game and simulate human behaviour by their gameplay being unrecognizable from hu­
man gameplay.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:11==
2
Magic Maze
Magic Maze is a real­time, cooperative game. It was designed by Kasper Lapp, a Danish
game designed from Copenhagen, as his first game, and was published in 2017. The
game revolves around four heroes trying to navigate inside of a shopping centre, steal
their designated items and exit the building.
2.1
Game description and rules
Magic Maze is a single­ or multi­player game. For the purpose of this thesis, only the
multi­player option is going to be discussed. It is a real­time game where all players act
simultaneously, with no specific order. It is a cooperative game, as all players are as a
team trying to reach a common goal. The game has perfect information since everything
on the board is visible to all players at the same time, and there are no cards that are
secret to any players.
All elements of the game are visually represented in the figure 2.1. Everything that is
depicted in the image represents the information visible to all players: the current state of
the board, the timer and the ”Do something” token.
2.1.1
Hero pawns
The game consists of four hero pawns. Each pawn is associated with a colour. Those
colours are yellow (Pyellow), green (Pgreen), orange (Porange) and purple (Ppurple). Ad­
ditionally, each pawn is associated with a tile coordinate describing its position on the
board. One tile cannot be occupied by more than one pawn at a time. Pawns cannot
move through each other or skip over each other. For a pawn to move to a tile, that tile
has to be currently unoccupied by any other pawn.
All players can perform actions on pawns of all colours, at any time. Players do not take
turns, they can act at any time. This action must be applicable to the given pawn and it
must be in the player’s action set.
2.1.2
Actions
For a given number of players n, (n ∈N|2 ≤n ≤8), n action cards Ai (i ∈N|1 ≤
i ≤n) are distributed among the n players in a random way. Each of the action cards
Ai describes a set of actions aj (j ∈N|1 ≤j ≤4) that are available to the given
player. The size of Ai depends on the number of players and the specific action card.
These actions aj either describe a cardinal direction in which the player can move the
pawns; or other action that player can perform. This is the set of all available actions:
Amove = {NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, WEST}, Aother = {ESCALATOR, DISCOVER, VORTEX}, Aall =
Amove ∪Aother.
Here is an example of action card distribution where n = 4:
A1 = {DISCOVER, SOUTH}, A2 = {NORTH}, A3 = {EAST, ESCALATOR}, A4 = {WEST, VORTEX}.
Let us furthermore define a set N = {1, . . . , n} and a count function c(x) = |{i ∈N : x ∈
Ai}|. The purpose of the count function c(x) is to count how many times a certain action
a occurs in the action sets of all players.
Furthermore, the following holds:
• ∀i ∈N : Ai ⊆Aall, 1 ≤|Ai| ≤4 (each Ai is a subset of all actions).
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Magic Maze: visual explanation
• ∪
i∈N Ai = Aall (each action is present at least once in the union of all action cards).
• ∀a ∈Aother : c(a) = 1 (each other action appears exactly once across all Ai).
• If n < 4, then ∀i ∈N : Ai ∩Amove ̸= ∅. If n ≥4, then ∀i ∈N : |Ai ∩Amove| = 1.
(each action card contains at at least one move action for 2 or 3 players, and exactly
one move action for 4 or more players).
• Since |Amove| = 4, if 2 ≤n ≤4, then ∀d ∈Amove :
c(d) = 1. If n > 4, then
∀d ∈Amove :
1 ≤c(d) ≤2, and ∃d ∈Amove :
c(d) = 2 (every move action is
present once for 2­4 players and once or twice for 5 or more players).
All the simulations and recorded games for the purpose of this thesis were 4­player games.
This decision was made in order to create a common variable across the games. How­
ever, the algorithms discussed are applicable to any number of players, and any distribu­
tion of actions, also those that do not necessarily follow the rules defined above; as long
as every action is present at least once amongst the players.
2.1.3
Cards and tiles
The board consists of cards. Each card is associated with a number, 1­12 for the total of
12 cards in the game. Each card is a 4 × 4 square, consisting of 16 tiles. In the beginning
of the game, only the starting card number 1 is visible. The rest of the cards (2­12) are
shuffled in a random order and placed face­down on the side. The fact that the cards are
shuffled randomly introduces non­determinism. During the gameplay, the once the card is
drawn, it is placed adjacent to the already discovered cards on the board in a deterministic
fashion, expanding the visible playing area.
Each tile has a tile type associated with it. The tile types include:
• PATH: ordinary tile with no special effect,
• OBSTACLE: no pawns can step on these,
4
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Magic Maze: cards overview
• VORTEX: a pawn can move to this tile from any tile after using the VORTEX action; each
VORTEX tile is associated with a card number,
• DISCOVERY: if a pawn is standing on this tile, DISCOVERY action allows for the top­
most card to be revealed and added to the board,
• TIMER: if any pawn steps on this tile, the timer is flipped over to the other side,
• ITEM GOAL: when all pawns are simultaneously standing on their respective item tile,
phase 1 ends and phase 2 starts,
• EXIT GOAL: when all pawns are simultaneously standing on their respective exit tile,
the game ends with a win for all players,
• START: this tile of a newly discovered card is placed adjacent to the DISCOVERY tile
that lead to uncovering this card.
Tiles of type VORTEX, DISCOVERY, ITEM GOAL, EXIT GOAL are assigned a colour corre­
sponding to one of the pawn colours: yellow, green, orange and purple. Pawns of any
colour can be standing on any tile. However, for the effect of these tile types to be appli­
cable, the colour of tile has to match the colour of the pawn standing on it.
Some tiles include ESCALATOR which connect bi­directionally two tiles A and B. Pawns
can use the escalator with the action ESCALATOR. If a pawn is standing at tile A and the
ESCALATOR action is is used on this pawn, the pawn moves to tile B, given that tile B is
not currently occupied by another pawn.
Each tile can be surrounded by walls from 0 to 4 sides. If a tile is not surrounded by any
walls, any action from Amove is applicable to a pawn standing at that tile. An action from
Amove is only applicable if the tile the pawn is currently standing at does not have a wall in
that direction. The OBSTACLE tiles are surrounded by walls from all 4 sides and therefore
no pawns can ever stand on them.
Visual representation of all 12 cards is displayed in figure 2.2. Notice that each card
includes exactly one tile from the set of {ITEM GOAL, EXIT GOAL, TIMER}.
2.1.4
Winning conditions
The game can be divided into two phases. In the first phase, the map is expended as
the cards get discovered. To conclude the first phase, each pawn must find their ITEM
GOAL tile. When all pawns are simultaneously standing on each of their respective ITEM
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Magic Maze: visual representation of unused (left) and used (right) timer
GOAL tiles corresponding to the pawn’s colour, phase 1 is concluded and phase 2 begins.
Phase 2 forbids using the VORTEX action. In phase 2, the goal for all pawns is to stand on
their respective EXIT GOAL tiles. Therefore, in order to win the game, in addition to the
starting card, at least all cards including ITEM GOAL and EXIT GOAL need to be discovered
and added to the map.
If both phases 1 and 2 are completed in this order and the timer has not run out, then the
game ends and all the players win.
2.1.5
Timer
The game includes an hourglass timer measuring 180 seconds. If any hero steps on the
TIMER tile, the hourglass is turned on the other side immediately. If at any point during the
game the hourglass timer runs out, measuring 0 seconds left, the game is immediately
over and lost.
The game includes a total of 4 TIMER tiles, specifically on cards number 1, 3, 4 and 5.
However, not all these cards need to be discovered and added to the map in order to
reach the winning condition. Timers are a consumable resource. Once a timer is used, it
cannot be used again. Visually, a used timer is represented by a darker colour of red, as
shown in figure 2.3 showing an unused timer on the left and a used one on the right.
To maximize the time available for the game, all (n = 4) TIMER tiles must be discovered
and used. The question when a timer should be flipped can be framed as a resource­
maximization task where the goal is to extend the total game duration Ttotal using a finite
number of flips (n = 4).
To show that flipping the timer before the half­way mark results in decreasing Ttotal, we
look at the lost potential of each flip. Let C be the total capacity of the sand timer in
seconds, so for our case C = 180. At any given moment t where 0 ≤t ≤C, the amount
of sand in the bottom half of the timer is t and the remaining sand in the top half is C −t.
Flipping the timer results in the bottom and the top halves switching ­ at time t, the new
remaining time in the top half becomes t, the amount of sand that was previously in the
bottom half.
The gain from a flip at time t is then the difference between the new time and the old time:
∆= t −(C −t) = 2t −C
For a flip to be beneficial, the gain ∆must be greater than zero:
6
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:15==
2t −C > 0
(2.1)
t > C
2
(2.2)
As defined by Osborne [4], an action is strictly dominated if there exists another action
that yields a strictly higher payoff regardless of other players’ choice. In the context of
Magic Maze, flipping the timer at t < C
2 is a strictly dominated action, as the agent would
achieve a strictly superior outcome by simply taking no action at all.
For example, flipping the timer after 60 seconds have passed (t = 60), one is only left with
those 60 seconds and the 120 seconds are discarded. This timer flip not only consumes
one TIMER resource, but also decreases Ttotal. Not using the timer at all in this situation
would therefore be more beneficial.
The optimal strategy for maximization of Ttotal is to wait as long as possible, ideally until
t is as close to C as possible. This maximizes the value of each flip. Flipping at t = 1
2C
results in Ttotal remaining unchanged. In order to increase Ttotal, the condition t > C
2 , in
our case t > 90 seconds must be fulfilled.
We can define Ttotal as the initial capacity of the timer plus the sum of times gained (or
lost) at each of the n flips:
Ttotal = C +
n
∑
i=1
∆i
(2.3)
Where ∆i represents the change in the remaining time at the moment of the ith flip. For
a flip at time ti the top of the timer transitions from (C −ti) to ti. The time gained or lost
at each flip is:
∆i = ti −(C −ti) = 2ti −C
(2.4)
To show the sensitivity of Ttotal with respect to the timing of a specific flip ti, we evaluate
the partial derivative:
∂Ttotal
∂ti
= ∂
∂ti

C +
n
∑
j=1
(2tj −C)


(2.5)
= ∂
∂ti
(2ti −C)
(2.6)
= 2
(2.7)
This result demonstrates that for every second a flip is delayed, the total game duration
Ttotal is increased by 2 seconds. Since ∂Ttotal
∂ti
> 0 for all ti, the function is monotoni­
cally increasing with respect to each ti. Because the derivative is a positive constant, it
is always beneficial to wait longer before flipping the timer. Following the principles of
rationality and dominated actions [4], the agent’s objective is to maximize ti to reach the
highest possible payoff in Ttotal. However, the agents must balance the waiting strategy
against the risk of the timer running out due to pathfinding and collaboration delays.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.6
”Do something” token
The game utilizes a ”Do something” token as the only allowed form of communication
between players. Any player i may place this token in front of another player b to signal
that, from i’s perspective, player j’s action set Aj includes a valid and strategically neces­
sary action. However, the token carries no indication about which hero or which specific
action is being requested. In the framework of Dynamic Epistemic Logic, van Ditmarsch
et al. [5] define a public announcement as an event that models the effect of a truthful
proposition being simultaneously communicated to all agents, resulting in a transition to a
new model where the state space is restricted to only those worlds where the announced
proposition holds. In the context of Magic Maze, placing the ”Do something” token acts
as such a public announcement. Upon its placement, it forces player j to reconsider their
plan based on the player i’s revealed perspective.
Fagin et al. define Common Knowledge in the framework of epistemic logic as the strongest
form of group belief, occurring when every agent in a group knows a proposition ϕ, ev­
eryone knows that everyone knows ϕ, and so on indefinitely [6]. The ”Do something”
token though lacking specific content creates such common knowledge that the current
joint strategy has reached a bottleneck from the perspective of at least agent i. Not only
does player i think that j should move, but all players now know that this belief has been
publicly aired. This creates a mutual expectation of coordination.
The use of the token is non­binding and non­consensual. Player j is not required to
perform an action upon receiving the token. Rather, the act serves as a prompt for j to re­
evaluate the global state. Depending on the agent’s internal model and current strategy,
this re­evaluation results in one of four possible behavioural responses:
• Successful coordination: Player j identifies and executes a move that aligns with
player i’s intent, effectively resolving the bottleneck.
• Strategic misalignment: Player j performs an action that does not match the specific
intent of player i.
• Stall: Player j cannot rationalize the announcement either due to a strategic dis­
agreement or an inability to identify any valid action in Aj and they choose to remain
idle.
• Delegation: Player j passes the ”Do something” token further. In this scenario,
the token acts as a recursive signal. Player j acknowledges the presence of a
bottleneck but indicates that, according to their plan, the necessary action lies within
the domain of another agent.
In the event of a strategic misalignment, the burden of coordination returns to player i,
who must then perform an analysis of player j’s move. Player i may choose to rational­
ize the move, updating their own internal strategy to accommodate j’s action as a valid
alternative. Otherwise, if i remains convinced of their original plan, they may strengthen
their stand by immediately re­placing the token in front of player j. This iterative signalling
functions as a form of non­verbal negotiation; the repetition of the announcement signals
a high degree of confidence in the original request.
2.1.7
Start of game
The game starts with card number 1 placed face­up on the board and the rest of the cards
(2­12) shuffled in a random way placed face­down in a stack on the side. All 4 heroes are
placed in a random distribution on the 4 centre tiles of card 1 as shown in figure 2.4.
Each player i is assigned one action set Ai specifying the actions they can perform. The
8
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Magic Maze: Start of the game set­up
”Do something” token is placed in front of no specific player. The hourglass timer is pre­
pared so all sand is on the bottom side and game starts when the timer is flipped. From
that moment, no verbal communication is allowed.
2.2
Search problem framework
In the field of Artificial Intelligence, a search problem is formally defined as a set of actions
that allow an agent to navigate from an initial state to a solution. As defined by Russel
and Norvig [7], a search problem consists of the following components:
• State space S: a set of possible states of the environment,
• Initial state so,
• Actions : set of actions that are applicable at a state s,
• Transition model: model describing what state s′ an action a applied to a state s
results in,
• Goal states: states from the state space that satisfy a given property,
• Action cost: cost of applying action a to state s to arrive to state s′.
To define Magic Maze as a search problem, we introduce a 5­tuple representing the spa­
cial and temporal configuration of the game environment at a given moment:
s = ⟨P, M, τ, R, α⟩
(2.8)
This 5­tuple expresses any given state by the spatial coordinate of the four pawns (P),
the discovered map cards and their orientation (M), the remaining time in the sand timer
(τ), the availability of the four TIMER tiles (R) and the current game phase (α).
2.2.1
State space S
The state space is the set of all possible configurations reachable from the initial state.
While a theoretical upper bound of the state space can be estimated through combina­
torics, the precise size of the reachable state space S is difficult to calculate due to the
interdependent constraints of the game. To calculate an upper­bound estimation of S, we
must calculate the combination of all independent variables within the 5­tuple s. The total
size of the state space |S| is the product of the sizes of the state space of each individual
component.
Map configuration M
There are 12 cards in total, where the card number 1 is always placed on the board and
the other eleven (2­12) can be added to the board during the course of the game.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Magic Maze: adding a card in different positional placements
Figure 2.6: Magic Maze: adding a card in different orientations
Each card can be added to the current map in more than one way. The number of possible
configurations of how a new card can be placed is determined by the number of available
DISCOVER tiles. A DISCOVER tile is available if it has no adjacent tile from exactly one side.
Two different scenarios are presented for the possibility of adding a card to the board.
The first scenario shown in figure 2.5 illustrates a situation where the four possibilities of
adding card number 2 to card number 1 differ in the positional placement of the added
card.
The second scenario illustrated in figure 2.6 is presenting a situation where the positional
placement of the added card number 4 remains the same but the card is rotated by a
different degree depending on whether the START tile on card number 4 is adjacent to
DISCOVERY tile on card 2 or 3.
A generalized formula for the number of possible map configurations |M| can be ex­
pressed as:
10
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:19==
|M| = (n −1)! ·
n−1
∏
i=1
di
(2.9)
where n is the total number of cards and di represents the number of available DISCOVER
tiles for the ith card added to the board. Since the orientation and position of the card
number 1 is fixed, there are n −1 cards that are shuffled in a random order, producing
(n −1)! possible combinations of ordering those (n −1) cards.
To estimate di, we consider the number of DISCOVER tiles on each of the cards. The mean
number of DISCOVER tiles on a card ¯d is:
¯d = 4 + 1 + 2 + 2 + 3 + 2 + 1 + 2 + 1 + 2 + 2 + 1
12
= 23
12
(2.10)
and the median value is 2. Each card placed on the board can make 1­4 DISCOVER tiles
unavailable, as shown in figure 2.6 where two DISCOVER tiles become unavailable by plac­
ing a single card. At the same time, since each card (number 2­12) has up to 3 DISCOVERY
tiles, adding one card can add up to three new available DISCOVER tiles to the map.
We assume that di = 4 + (i −1), meaning that each step adds two available DISCOVER
tiles while making exactly one DISCOVER tile unavailable. This will provide us with an
upper­bound estimate. After substitution, we get:
|M| = (n −1)! ·
n−1
∏
i=1
4 + (i −1)
(2.11)
Specifically for this version of the game where (n = 12), we can conclude the number of
possible map configurations |M| to be:
|M| = (11)! ·
11
∏
i=1
(i + 3)
(2.12)
= 11! · 14!
6
(2.13)
≈5.8 × 1017
(2.14)
This underlines that even with a deck of 12 tiles, the variety of the map alone is significantly
large.
Pawn positions P
The number of combinations of all valid pawn positions is dependent on M. To estimate
the upper bound of the number of possible distributions of pawns across the map, we
must first look at the number of tiles the four pawns can be standing at. Each of the 12
cards includes at least one OBSTACLE tile which pawns cannot stand at.
In a scenario with only card number 1 on the board, there are 15 tiles available for the 4
pawns. That results in 15×14×13×12 ≈3.3×104 combinations. On the other hand, if all
cards have been discovered, there are 16 × 12 = 192 tiles out of which 55 are OBSTACLE
tiles resulting in 192 −55 = 137 available tiles and 137 × 136 × 135 × 134 ≈3.4 × 108
possible combinations of pawn placements.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
11
==PAGE:20==
Since each tile has a different number of OBSTACLE tiles but never less than 1, we will
define the upper bound for number of pawn configurations |Pk| where k ∈{1, ...12} is the
number of cards on the board as:
|Pk| < P(15k, 4)
(2.15)
P(15k, 4) =
(15k)!
(15k −4)!
(2.16)
= (15k) · (15k −1) · (15k −2)˙(15k −3)
(2.17)
< (15k)4
(2.18)
Together for all k ∈{1, ...12}:
|P| <
12
∑
k=1
(15k)4 ≈3.1 × 109
(2.19)
This shows that the upper bound for number of distributions of the 4 pawns across the
board is significantly smaller than the map configurations however, still significant.
Timer state τ
To simplify the domain, we will convert the continuous time variable into a discrete one,
counting the number of seconds rounded to a whole second. This simplifies the problem
into:
|τ| = 180
(2.20)
which gives 180 unique values for the timer.
TIMER tiles availability R
The TIMER tiles availability can be modelled as list {r1, r2, r3, r4} where each element ri
represents the availability of one TIMER and can take on values 0 (TIMER tile is used) or 1
(TIMER tile is available). The number of permutations is then:
|R| = 24 = 16
(2.21)
giving 16 possibilities for TIMER tile availability.
Game phase α
The game phase can only take on two values: either phase 1 or phase 2. The number of
possibilities is therefore simply:
|α| = 2
(2.22)
Total state space
To find the total upper bound for the state space of Magic Maze, we consider the number
of options for each independent element Xi of the 5­tuple s and using the product rule we
get:
12
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:21==
|S| =
k
∏
i=1
|Xi| = |P| × |M| × |τ| × |R| × |α|
(2.23)
= (5.8 × 1017) × (3.1 × 109) × (180) × (16) × (2)
(2.24)
≈1.04 × 1031
(2.25)
Pruning of states
As previously mentioned, these calculations provide the upper bound for the state space
estimation. It is important to note that many of these aforementioned combinations are
not obtainable.
As one example, the temporal dependency of each state s means that even though a
physical configuration of the map is valid, it might be unreachable under the combination
of τ and R. While it is clear that the map cannot be fully discovered with τ = 179 and
R = {1, 1, 1, 1}, meaning only one second has passed and none of the timer resources
have been consumed, it is impossible to draw a clear line which states are and are not
reachable given a temporal constraint. This temporal reachability boundary is dependent
on the players’ processing and execution abilities.
Similar conclusions can be drawn to the relation between M and α where in order for
α = 2, all tiles ITEM GOAL and EXIT GOAL must have been discovered.
While the calculated upper bound for the state space lies at 1031, the actual size of S is
significantly smaller.
Implications for algorithms
By applying the Fundamental Counting Principle to the five dimensions of the state­tuple,
the total upper bound for the game’s state space is estimated at approximately 1.04×1031.
This astronomical magnitude confirms that Magic Maze belongs to a class of highly com­
plex multi­agent coordination problems where the state space is too vast for exhaustive
enumeration. This means that traditional uninformed search strategies such as Breadth­
First Search (BFS) or Depth­First Search (DFS) are obsolete. As Russell and Norvig [7]
demonstrate, when the branching factor is high and the depth of the solution is significant,
exhaustive enumeration becomes computationally unfeasible.
2.2.2
Initial state s0
To define the initial state s0 of Magic Maze, we will define the 5­tuple s = ⟨P, M, τ, R, α⟩
at the beginning of the game.
• P: All four pawns {Pyellow, Pgreen, Porange, Ppurple} are randomly placed on the four
central starting squares of the starting card 1 (shown in figure 2.4). There are 4 ×
3 × 2 × 1 = 24 possible combinations for placement of these 4 pawns on the 4 tiles.
• M: The map consists of only card number 1. All other eleven cards (2­12) are
shuffled in a randomized order and remain in the face­down draw pile.
• τ: The sand timer is at its maximum capacity at τ = 180.
• R: The set of available TIMER resources is initialize to maximum: all 4 timers are
available. The first timer is present and available on the board on card 1 and the
other 3 are on the so­far­undiscovered cards. {r1, r2, r3, r4} = {1, 1, 1, 1}
• α: The game starts in game phase 1.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
13
==PAGE:22==
2.2.3
Actions
The set of actions applicable at a given state s is dependent on the pawn colour (Pyellow,
Pgreen, Porange, Ppurple), the pawn’s position on the map and the map itself. In general, an
action from the set Amove is applicable to a given pawn under those conditions:
• there exists a tile in that direction,
• the tile is unoccupied by another pawn,
• there is no wall between those tiles.
The action DISCOVER is only applicable if:
• the pawn is standing on a DISCOVER tile of the same colour as the pawn,
• the DISCOVER tile is available (it has no adjacent tile from exactly one side),
• there are still undiscovered cards in the deck.
The action ESCALATOR is only applicable if:
• the pawn is standing on an ESCALATOR tile,
• the other side of the escalator is unoccupied by another pawn.
The action VORTEX is always associated with a colour and the card number the vortex is
on. Each card has at most one vortex of a given colour. The VORTEX action is applicable
if:
• the card with the vortex has been discovered,
• the card includes a vortex of the same colour as the pawn,
• the destination vortex is unoccupied by another pawn,
• it is phase 1 (sicne phase 2 prohibits the use of vortexes).
2.2.4
Transition model
The consequences of the actions only happen if all the conditions for the given action are
fulfilled. The actions from set Amove move the given pawn in that direction. The ESCALATOR
action moves the pawn to the other side of the escalator. The VORTEX action moves the
pawn to the chosen vortex. The DISCOVER action draws the top­most card from the face­
down deck and adds it to the board in such a way that the START tile of the new card is
placed adjacent to the tile the discovering pawn is currently standing at.
2.2.5
Goal states
The states where all pawns are simultaneously standing on the EXIT GOAL tile of their
corresponding colour, given that at an earlier state of the game all pawns were simultane­
ously standing on the ITEM GOAL tile of their corresponding colour (transition from α = 1
to α = 2). Additionally, the time τ at that moment must satisfy τ > 0.
2.2.6
Action cost
Each action costs 1.
14
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:23==
3
Choice of algorithms
As previously discussed in 2.2.1, due to the vastly large state space, the traditional strate­
gies for uninformed search such as BFS and DFS are not suitable [7, Chapter 4]. In this
chapter, we will explore the more appropriate algorithmic choice for solving the search
problem and the simplifications introduced in order to lower the complexity.
3.1
Plan generation
In formal search problem framework, we distinguish between two fundamental structures:
state­space graphs and search trees. A state­space graph is a mathematical abstraction
where each node is a unique configuration of the world [7, Chapter 3]. These nodes are
connected through edges. In the context of Magic Maze, the edges represent actions
discussed in section 2.2.3. Graphs can include cycles, sequences of actions that return
to a previously visited state. In the context of search algorithms, cyclic states introduces
two primary risks.
The first risk is the creation of infinite search paths. According to Russel and Norgiv [7,
Section 3.3.3], in a state space that is large enough to be practically infinite, a search al­
gorithm that does not specifically track visited states may follow a cycle indefinitely, failing
to ever reach the goal. Even in finite spaces, cycles can lead to redundant computation
where the agent does not make progress towards the goal.
The second risk is the redundant path expansion. In a state­space graph, multiple paths
can lead to the same state. If each path is treated by the agent as a new discovery, we
arrive to exponential explosion of the state space. According to [8], in motion planning
in grid based environments such as Magic Maze, cycles often represent wasted effort
unless the state has changed in a hidden dimension ­ such as the timer τ decreasing.
Russel and Norvig [7] define the planning process as the systematic transformation of a
graph­based world into a tree­based path. While the state­space graph defines all the
possibilities, the search tree translates this into the specific unfolding of these possibil­
ities, starting from s0, the root of the tree. Similarly to graphs, trees consist of nodes
corresponding to states which are interconnected by edges representing the actions to
traverse from one node to another. However, unlike graphs, each branch of the tree rep­
resents a distinct path of actions. According to Russel and Norvig [7], a search tree is
a primary mechanism through which an agent expands the frontier of the environment.
They expand the leaf nodes, discovering new states, until a goal condition is satisfied. For
those reasons, search trees have been selected as the data structure used for storing the
agent’s plans.
3.1.1
Tree simplifications
The two parameters playing the biggest role in the large size of the state space is the
size of M and P. In order to reduce the complexity of the search tree, we introduce
simplifications to reduce the size of M and P.
In order to decrease the complexity of M, we will only consider the current state of the
map. Treating the map as a static part of the board rather than a dynamic one, where
all the future possibilities would have to be factored­in, removes the factor of M from the
complexity. When the map changes, the strategy is re­evaluated for the new state of the
map and the search tree is re­built.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
15
==PAGE:24==
To reduce the size of |P|, instead of looking at all 4 pawns simultaneously, we will only
consider the possibilities for one pawn at a time. Since the positions of the four pawns
are now independent from each other, instead of multiplying the number of possibilities for
each pawn, they are added together. However, this simplification also introduces the issue
of the pawns having incompatible plans and paths. Due to the restriction coming from the
game rules, no two pawns can be standing on the same tile at the same time. However,
since pawn A does not see pawn B in its plan, it is possible that A’s plan comes to a
point where it needs to move to a tile currently occupied by B. To maintain the simplicity
of the plan, rather than maintaining robust and complex plans, the conflicts are handled
only when they emerge. Conflict handling is discussed later in detail in 3.2.1.
Additionally, time τ can be abstracted from s completely. Though it is necessary to keep
track of it for the winning/losing condition and evaluating the priority of flipping the timer,
including it directly in the plan and therefore planning for all possible timer states in com­
bination with the moves of pawns across the map introduces a large branching factor that
does not bring decisive advantage to the plan.
3.1.2
Leaves of the tree
In a standard search problem, the leaf nodes are the frontier of the tree. Those are the
endpoints of every currently explored path that have not yet been expanded. In traditional
search algorithms (DFS, BFS), the search continues until one of these leaf nodes satisfies
the goal test. However, for a problem with large tree depth, such as Magic Maze, the path
from s0 to the goal state involves hundreds of steps. Constructing such a tree would result
in combinatorial explosion in the context of the tree’s depth [7]. Additionally, due to the
previously mentioned simplification of only creating the plan for the currently visible static
map M, the goal state might be unachievable for the current map composition due to
undiscovered cards.
To address this issue, the tree’s architecture was re­defined to instead have sub­goals as
leafs. These sub­goals are intermediate destinations that serve as milestones that help
achieve the goal of the game. By shifting the search horizon to these sub­goals, the depth
of the tree is significantly reduced. This translates into conversion of a global search into
a series of multiple local searches. This strategy aligns with the concept of hierarchical
planning and task decomposition, in which a complex problem is broken into smaller sub­
problems. Russel and Norvig show that breaking a high­level goal into a sequence of
small sub­goals re­sets the depth d for each sub­search, keeping the total computational
cost low. [7]
Choice of sub­goals
The sub­goals were chosen so that their achievement directly or indirectly helps achieve
the goal state. Those that directly influence reaching the goal state are:
• discovering new cards,
• reaching ITEM GOAL tiles in phase 1,
• reaching EXIT GOAL tiles in phase 2.
The sub­goal that indirectly influences the accomplishing of the goal state is:
• flipping the timer.
If the timer runs out at any point, the game is over. The timer therefore has a direct
influence on the losing condition. However, flipping the timer does not bring the game
any closer to being won.
16
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:25==
Sub­goal prioritization
As previously shown in section 2.1.5, flipping the timer does not give the same gain ∆at
all states of the timer. Therefore, the sub­goal of reaching the timer should not have a
static pay­off and rather one that is dependent on τ. Similar goes for ITEM GOAL and EXIT
GOAL tiles with regards to α.
To account for different states of the game, each leaf in the tree is assigned a priority value
P upon generation. This approach aligns with the concept of utility­based agents. The
desirability of a state (in this case a sub­goal) is calculated through a utility function that
accounts for the current state of the game. According to Russel and Norvig [7], a utility
function allows an agent to choose between conflicting goals. This ensures that the agent
is guided towards the most valuable sub­goal rather than the closest one.
This utility function takes into consideration:
• the distance to the sub­goal from the current position of the pawn,
• the phase of the game α,
• the state of the timer τ,
• whether all EXIT GOAL and ITEM GOAL tiles have been discovered,
• whether all cards have been discovered.
Sub­goals further away are prioritized lower than the ones closer to the current position of
the agent. The distance is calculated using Manhattan distance. It calculates the sum of
the absolute distances of the two Cartesian coordinates (|x1 −x2| + |y1 −y2|). While not
precise in the context of Magic Maze due to the presence of walls and OBSTACLE tiles, it
provides a simple estimation for distance of sub­goals to the current pawn’s position. On
a grid where only cardinal moves are allowed, this heuristic would be admissible since
it never over­estimates the distance between two points [7]. However, the presence of
ESCALATORs in Magic Maze introduces an anomaly to the grid structure, since these al­
low the pawn to traverse two or more squares of Manhattan distance in a single action.
Therefore, according to the formal definition of admissibility where h(n) ≤h∗(n), in other
words the heuristic may never over­estimate [7], this heuristic is inadmissible for cases
where the path involves escalators and is uninterrupted by walls.
While shown in section 2.1.5 that the timer gain ∆is linear, the longer one waits, the bigger
the gain, the utility function for flipping the timer is not. Instead, the utility function of the
timer is a logarithmic function with base > 2, since flipping the timer before it reaches half
is a strictly dominated strategy, as explained in 2.1.5. The reason for the logarithmic utility
function is to model risk aversion. As τ approaches zero, the pressure to act must increase
non­linearly to account for multi­agent coordination to get the pawn to the location.
The implementation of a logarithmic utility function for the timer is grounded in Prospect
Theory. It suggests that decision­makers have non­linear sensitivity to potential losses.
Humans do not perceive changes in a linear way. Instead they perceive changes in pro­
portional shifts, known as diminishing sensitivity [9].
The specific implementation of the prospect theory follows the following formula for cal­
culation of priority P where b is a base of the logarithm and b > 2:
P = 2 × max
(
0,
⌊
logb
(Tmax
τ
)⌋)
(3.1)
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
17
==PAGE:26==
This categorizes P to flip the timer at a given remaining time τ into discrete priority levels.
This discretization serves as a computational proxy for interval­based risk assessment, a
concept rooted in Prospect Theory [9].
3.1.3
Path to each sub­goal
Each tree represents one pawn’s possible paths. The root node is the pawn’s current
position and the leaves are the sub­goals with assigned priority. To complete the tree, we
need to create the paths from the root to each of the leaves. To construct the search tree,
the algorithm performs a series of localized pathfinding operations. For each sub­goal, it
finds the optimal path leading from the current pawn’s position.
The agent performs an A* search on each sub­goal. A* is an informed search algorithm
that identifies the lowest­cost path. It works on the principle of minimizing the evaluation
function f(n) = g(n)+h(n) where g(n) represents the exact cost of the path from the root
to the current node and h(n) is the estimated cost to the goal node [7]. This estimation is
performed using a heuristic function, in our case the Manhattan distance. As established
earlier in section 3.1.2, due to the presence of ESCALATORs, this heuristic is inadmissible.
As discussed by Russell and Norvig [7], the strict requirement for heuristic admissibil­
ity can be relaxed in favour of computational efficiency, particularly in time­constrained
environments. While the heuristic is inadmissible in specific local contexts, the resulting
reduction in node expansion allows the agent to generate paths in real­time as overesti­
mation leads to fewer nodes getting expanded in shorter time.
To optimize the pathfinding performance, the A* algorithm has been modified to implement
a pruning strategy, restricting the use of the VORTEX action to the root of the search tree.
A VORTEX action is only optimal if it immediately reduces the Manhattan distance to the
sub­goal more than a cardinal movement. Furthermore, a distance filter is applied where
a VORTEX V is only added to the frontier if dist(V, Goal) < dist(Start, Goal). These two
pruning strategies actions reduce the maximum branching factor from 6+|V | to 6+|Va| for
d = 0 and to 6 for depths d > 0 where d is the tree depth, V is the set of all vortexes and
Va is the set of all vortexes whose use reduces the distance to Goal. The basic maximum
branching factor is 6 due to the six other actions that can be performed: four from Amove,
and DISCOVER and ESCALATOR from Aother.
The paths are then added to the tree. They are all merged at the root and the paths main­
tain common prefixes where the paths overlap. This results in a search tree of action
sequences where the depth of the tree is equivalent to the length of the longest optimal
path to a sub­goal. According to LaValle [8], this method of forward­projecting paths from
a single source to multiple targets allows the agents to have a clear plan set. The rela­
tionships between the different paths are visible, enabling a clear informed selection of
the next optimal move based on priorities assigned to the sub­goals.
3.1.4
Example of a search tree
Figure 3.1 showcases a specific example of a search tree for Pyellow. The game in figure
3.1a is at a state where τ = 148. As visible on the board and also in the search tree itself
in figure 3.1b, yellow has 7 possible sub­goals in order of decreasing priority rounded to
1 decimal precision:
18
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:27==
1. DISCOVER with priority P = 4.6
2. DISCOVER with priority P = 4.0
3. DISCOVER with priority P = 3.2
4. TIMER with priority P = −0.4
5. TIMER with priority P = −0.6
6. TIMER with priority P = −0.8
7. TIMER with priority P = −1.0
(a) Board with visualized paths overlay
(b) Search tree
Figure 3.1: Magic Maze: Search tree for yellow pawn
The priority of the goals of the same type decreases at the Manhattan distance to them
increases. Note that even though sub­goal 5 requires fewer steps to reach than sub­goal
4, it is prioritised lower due to the higher Manhattan distance. Furthermore, since τ = 148,
flipping the timer would be disadvantageous in the given moment, therefore all priorities
of TIMER sub­goals (4, 5, 6, 7) have negative priority.
The paths have been merged into a tree, sharing the longest possible pre­fixes. For
example, sub­goals 3 and 6 share the sequence ROOT, VORTEX(21, 18), MOVE_SOUTH before
separating into two branches at depth d = 3.
Paths to the three DISCOVERY sub­goals have been visualized in figure 3.1a with an overlay
of hand­drawn arrows. Looking at the path leading to sub­goal 3, the path starts with
VORTEX at position (21, 18) in the grid as the optimal choice for the shortest path. At depth
d = 2, action leads to a tile that is at τ = 148 occupied by Ppurple. This is as expected,
since the search tree for Pyellow does not take into consideration the positions of other
pawns. It possible that other agents plan for Ppurple and move the pawn to a different tile
before Pyellow needs to reach the tile where conflict would emerge.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
19
==PAGE:28==
3.2
Plan execution
Now that the agent has a search tree for pathfinding of localized sub­goals, the focus
shifts from theoretical individual planning to coordinated active execution. The agent must
use the generated tree in order to make informed decisions and perform actions that are
optimal according to the search tree. This section will discuss how the agent uses the
tree to make decisions and execute actions, what happens when other agents execute
actions that either are or are not expected according to the search tree, and when the
search tree must be re­computed.
3.2.1
Execution according to plan
The agent’s search tree serves two purposes: to determine the optimal moves and to stay
on top of the actions performed by other agents. If the actions performed by other agents
align with the agent’s own tree, the agent can recognise their supposed intention. If they
do not, the agent re­computes the tree to rationalize the action so that it aligns with the
newly generated search tree.
Executing best action
The agent performs a search across all leaf nodes of the tree to identify the maximum
priority value Pmax. This execution logic is grounded in Maximum Expected Utility (MAU)
theory where the agents selects the initial action of the branch terminating in the highest
priority leaf node [7]. For this specific implementation of MAU, it is adjusted so that it
only accounts for priorities that are positive. Negative or zero priorities in the context of
Magic Maze signify that the sub­goal has a negative consequence on the goal state’s
accomplishment.
In the example in figure 3.1, the sub­goal 1 ending in DISCOVER has the highest priority
P = 4.6. The agent therefore selects this branch of the tree leading to that leaf as the
intended optimal plan. When the optimal branch is identified, the agent i must determine
if the immediate next action Anext at the root of the branch falls within the agent’s own
action set Ai. If Anext ∈Ai, then the agent executes that move immediately. Otherwise,
agent remains idle.
Conflict of pawns
As previously suggested in 3.1.4, the agent does not take the other pawns’ positions and
plans into consideration when planning for a given pawn. This has the potential to result
in a situation where pawn i’s plan involves moving onto a tile that is currently occupied
by pawn j. Since a tile can at most be occupied by one pawn at once, this introduces a
conflict. This conflict can be resolved by the pawn j re­locating and then pawn i continuing
their previously started execution path.
The mechanism for resolving pawn collisions is based on the theory of social laws for arti­
ficial agent societies proposed by Shoham and Tennenholtz [10]. When pawn i’s optimal
planned path is obstructed, the agent does not force a complex re­plan for the blocking
pawn j. Instead, it invokes a protocol where the blocking pawn is re­located to an adjacent
tile or a nearby vortex to clear the path for pawn i.
This strategy mirrors the ’right­of­way’ conventions discussed by Shoham and Tennen­
holtz. There, agents follow a minimal set of constraints preventing dead­locks [10]. By
prioritizing the immediate clearing of the trajectory for pawn i over the pawn j’s long­term
objectives, the system ensures that the primary pawn, pawn i pursuing a high­priority
sub­goal, can maintain its momentum. This approach treats pawn j as a cooperative
social agent that moves not to reach a sub­goal but rather to clear the path and allow
another one to do so. This preserves the global fluid movement, effectively fulfilling a so­
cial law that maximizes the collective utility of the group while maintaining a low individual
20
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:29==
computational cost due to perseverance of the original search tree of agent i.
Reaction upon execution
When any agent performs an action, it serves as a public announcement, fundamen­
tally altering the common knowledge of the collective of the agents. According to van
Ditmarsch [5], a public announcement is an event that eliminates the worlds that are in­
consistent with the observed action. In this case, they eliminate branches of the agent’s
search tree. When an agent moves a pawn, not only does the physical state of the board
get changed, but it is also broadcasted to all agents as a signal them to update their search
tree.
Specifically to the implementation of the algorithm, all agents subscribe to these an­
nouncements. When an announcement is made, all agents attempt a root shift in their
search tree. The executed action is located in the edges of the root and the child of that
edge is promoted to be the new root. In other words, all the other branches that do not
start by this action get eliminated and the only remaining child node of the root becomes
the root, eliminating the starting root too.
This synchronisation process can be viewed as an implementation of forward induction.
Forward induction is a principle from game theory where the actions of other players ob­
served in the past are used to infer strategic intentions and form the player’s own future
rationality. Unlike backward induction focusing on future rationality, forward induction al­
lows the agent to justify sub­optimal or unexpected teammate moves by assuming that
they are following from other agent’s rational plan, even if different from agent’s own.
Kohlberg and Mertens [11] claim that a rational player’s move is to be interpreted as a
sign of their future strategy. If an agent observes a teammate moving a pawn in a di­
rection that was not their own top­priority choice, it does not mean that the agent made
a mistake and the last move should be rejected. Instead, through forward induction, the
agent assumes the teammate’s action is part of a rational path towards a valid leaf node
within the teammate’s search tree. The agent then updates their own beliefs (search tree)
to align with this new plan. This maintains the coordination even if the individual priorities
were at first not compatible.
3.2.2
Execution outside of a plan
Actions that are expected, even if not optimal, are the outgoing edges of the root of the
agent’s search tree. They allow for straightforward intra­agent coordination. However, this
is not always the case. When an announcement occurs that cannot be reconciled with
an agent’s current search tree, it triggers re­planning. This as a response to a recently
moved pawn can happen for one of two reasons:
• the pawn for which the agent planned moved in an unexpected way,
• a pawn was moved that the agent did not plan for (different colour).
While both reasons are rooted in different places, they both result in re­computation of
the tree. As established by Battigalli and Siniscalchi [12], strong belief in teammate’s ra­
tionality requires the agent to re­build their own model of the game when faced with an
unexpected evidence that contradicts their current induction. In this specific implementa­
tion, the agent discards the entire obsolete tree and generate a new one from the latest
board state. This effectively re­sets their forward induction based on the latest public
information.
The re­plan is executed for the given pawn that was last to move. If a pawn which the
agent originally planned for was moved in an unexpected way, the agent re­plans for that
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
21
==PAGE:30==
same pawn. If another pawn was moved, the agent shifts focus onto that pawn instead,
trying to rationalize the intention behind the last move.
Empty search tree
In the context of Magic Maze, we will consider a search tree to be empty under one of
these two conditions:
• the tree only consists of the root node or has no nodes at all,
• all the leaves of the tree have negative or zero priority.
An empty search tree is a result of a recently reached sub­goal. When a sub­goal is
reached by descending in the search tree, the tree has only the root node left upon reach­
ing the leaf and descending in the search tree one last time. In that case, the agent needs
to re­plan by looking for new sub­goals for the pawn and re­evaluating the current state
of the game.
If a new tree has just been generated, it is possible that the tree has all leaves with negative
or zero priority. This translates into the pawn not having any sub­goals whose fulfilment
would help accomplish the goal state. In that case, re­generating the tree for the same
pawn colour would not yield any improvement, since the current pawn has no available
sub­goals. Therefore, a pawn of a different colour must be considered and a search tree
must be built for that colour instead. This process repeats until one of the pawns has
at least one sub­goal with non­negative and non­zero priority that they then continue to
pursue.
The agent’s lifecycle follows the Belief­Desire­Intention (BDI) architecture. BDI is a rea­
soning model that describes how an autonomous agent balances goal­directed behaviour
with reactivity [13]. In this implementation, the agent’s Belief is represented by s with the
state of map M, position of pawns P, timer τ, remaining available TIMER tiles R and
game stage α. The Desire is the set of prioritized sub­goals with non­negative priority.
The selection of the highest­priority branch in the search tree is the basis for the agent’s
Intention. It creates a committed plan of action that the agent persists on executing as
long as the state remains consistent. When the pawn reaches its destination, the search
tree becomes empty, signalling that the current intention has been satisfied. According
to the BDI framework, this intentional completion requires the agent to drop the current
commitment and return to the initial phase. There, it perceives the updated board and
forms new Intentions. This ensures that the agent does not remain idle after completing
a sub­goal but instead continuously cycles through observation, planning and execution,
driving the game towards the goal state.
”Do something” token
An important element of the game described previously in 2.1.6 is the ”Do something”
token serving as a public announcement. Agent i can use the ”Do something” token in a
situation where the next action Anext in the search tree leading to the sub­goal with the
highest priority is not in their action set Anext /∈Ai. In that case, they place the token in
front of the agent j for which Anext ∈Aj.
Agent j now tries to rationalize the signal that an action from their action set Aj contains
an action Anext, based on i’s search tree. Agent j first considers their own strategy and
evaluates whether Anext ∈Aj for their current search tree. If not, they re­plan for the
other pawns’ colours until they find a search tree for which Anext ∈Aj. This process is
similar to re­planning upon arriving at an empty search tree.
Similarly to updating their own tree, even towards a non­optimal path, based on other
players’ actions, the agents interpret a ”Do something” token as a sign of agent i’s future
22
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:31==
strategy [11]. Assuming that agents are rational, agent j re­computes their search tree
until they can find one in which ∃a ∈Aj, a = Anext .
If agent j cannot find a path for which Anext ∈Aj and therefore cannot rationalize i’s
signal to ”Do something”, agent j can do one of following:
• refrain from doing anything,
• perform a random action from Aj,
• place ”Do something” token in front of another player.
These three different options each exhibit a different type of behaviour. To introduce the
need for implicit coordination amongst agents, their algorithms must differ in their core
parameters. If all agents involved in the game generate the trees in the same way, they
would always agree with each other’s strategies. As the main goal for the thesis is intra­
agent coordination, different player types were introduced. These player types are based
in humans, how they interact with other players during the game, what they experience
and what effect their subjective experiences have on their decision making.
3.3
Player types
The simulation of diverse agent personalities is fundamental for capturing the strategic
friction in the game of Magic Maze that comes from the difference in player’ strategies and
capabilities. In this thesis, the development of the player types of autonomous agents be­
gan with observations of human play. These included game observations, unstructured
interviews, game transcriptions analysis and player questionnaires. From these obser­
vations, 12 distinct variables were defined to create three unique player types. These
variables influence the processing capacity and efficiency, prioritization of sub­goals, re­
action to other people’s actions and others.
The player types reflect the behavioural diversity found in the human play. Rather than
creating a perfect play model where the agents would always be in accord in regards to
strategy and perform the optimal actions, the model instead exhibits the various strate­
gic orientations. In a multi­agent system, the necessity for implicit coordination arises
specifically from the heterogeneity of strategies. If a team was composed of identical
player types, conflict would be non­existent because every agent would reach the same
optimal conclusion simultaneously. Due to different processing capacity and sub­goal
prioritization, the agents create conflicting plans. Consequently, the coordination prob­
lem becomes not merely a spacial search but a process where the agents resolve these
conflicts through observation and adaptation.
The difficulty of coordination between heterogenous player types can be understood through
Schelling’s [14] theory of focal points. Schelling defines a focal point as a prominent or
outstanding part of the environment the agent is in. In a coordination game with limited
communication, the agents must rely on these focal points and clues to harmonize the
expectations. In the context of Magic Maze, some of these behavioural variables create
different rules for what an agent might consider a focal point. While some might focus
on the timer, others might ignore it and prioritize discovery. Coordination between the
agents utilizes the public announcements of movement to converge to a hopefully single
focal point.
3.3.1
Observations and data gathering
In order to create the behavioural variables that are the basis for defining the player types,
multiple data gathering methods were used to both include but also exclude players’ own
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
23
==PAGE:32==
bias. Three methods were used for gathering data about gameplay. Firstly, human game­
play was observed from a third person perspective, concentrating on the team’s dynamic
and player tendencies. At the end of each game, the players were asked to reflect on
the game, the coordination, communication and strategy alignment. Secondly, games
were video recorded and later transcribed and analysed. The transcription concentrated
on the actions, their timing, and the use of the ”Do something” token. The transcriptions
allowed for an unbiased quantitative assessment and re­playability. Thirdly, players filled
in a structured questionnaire asking both quantitative and qualitative questions concen­
trating on the players’ personal experiences and emotions. This provided a biased view
into the player’s own introspective on their strategies and abilities.
These three methods of data gathering involved some of the same people across all
three methods. In total, 17 people in 6 different group configurations, all of 4 players,
were involved in the data gathering process. The players’ experience with the game
spanned from being newly introduced to the game to themselves owning the game and
being familiar with it.
Game observations
The first means of data collection was conducted through unstructured qualitative ob­
servations of live human gameplay sessions. We adopted the role of a non­participant
observer and the players were fully informed of the observation and its purpose. This
third­person perspective allowed for a real­time capture of behaviour, reactions, coordi­
nation and non­verbal signalling between the players which transcriptions of actions do
not capture.
To supplement these observations and allow the players to have an open discussion, each
session concluded with an unstructured post­game debrief. This allowed for interpretive
validation of the observations made during the game and added the internal perspective
of each player that might not have been captured through the third­person observation.
All notes taken during the observations were later analysed and supplemented with a
summary of the main emerging behavioural patterns. Key behaviour was grouped and
key elements were identified for each game, summarized under ’Player type impact’. All
game notes, summaries, and analysis can be seen in detail in appendix A. At this stage
a total of 11 behavioural variables were identified across the games:
• Timer sensitivity: how early an agent considers the timer to be the highest priority
(observed in A.1, A.4),
• Processing ratio: how quickly an agent can process new information (observed in
A.2, A.5),
• Starting capacity: how much information can an agent keep track of at once (ob­
served in A.5),
• Patience: how long does the agent wait before placing ”Do something” token (ob­
served in A.6, A.7, A.8),
• Blindness: how likely the agent is to miss that a pawn has been moved and react
to it (observed in A.3),
• Stubborn: whether the agent prefers their own strategy and is unwilling to re­
evaluate (observed in A.9),
• Stressed by the ”Do something” token: whether the processing capacity of the
agent decreases upon receiving the ”Do something” token (observed in A.1, A.6),
24
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:33==
• Stressed by placing the ”Do something” token: whether the processing capacity
of the agent decreases upon placing the ”Do something” token (observed in A.5),
• Stressed by low time: whether the processing capacity of the agent decreases
when the timer is running low (observed in A.5),
• Always place the ”Do something” token: whether an agent hesitates to place
the ”Do something” token based on previously observed negative response from
another player (observed in A.7),
• Discover until goals: whether the agent prefers to discover all cards or only those
that are absolutely necessary for satisfying to goal condition (observed in A.6).
These established common variables across the games served as the basis for verification
in the questionnaire and were subsequently chosen to be part of the 12 final behavioural
variables that are refined and described in detail in section 3.3.2.
Game transcriptions
To supply the qualitative observations and unstructured interviews with the players with
qualitative data, a total of 6 games were recorded on video and subsequently manually
transcribed. The games were transcribed and translated into a structured file keeping
track of the actions and the ”Do something” token timestamps. This allowed not only
for quantitative analysis without the cognitive bias of an observer but also re­playability,
allowing to analyse sections of the gameplay after the fact.
For each game, the timestamps of game moves and ”Do something” tokens were eval­
uated. For each, median, mean and mode of the time differences between subsequent
actions were calculated. Out of the 6 games, games 3 and 6 ended up in a loss while
games 1, 2, 4 and 5 were winning games.
Table 3.1: Human gameplay: Do something timestamps statistics
File Name
Count
Mean (s)
Median (s)
Mode (s)
human_gameplay_1.json
24
23.00
13.0
13.0
human_gameplay_2.json
46
15.61
9.0
0.5
human_gameplay_3.json
67
7.64
6.75
3.0
human_gameplay_4.json
32
10.39
5.0
5.0
human_gameplay_5.json
15
20.79
14.0
38.0
human_gameplay_6.json
26
12.52
8.0
3.0
Table 3.2: Human gameplay: Game actions timestamps statistics
File Name
Count
Mean (s)
Median (s)
Mode (s)
human_gameplay_1.json
289
2.29
1.0
0.5
human_gameplay_2.json
289
2.49
1.0
0.5
human_gameplay_3.json
221
2.33
1.0
0.5
human_gameplay_4.json
256
1.36
0.5
0.5
human_gameplay_5.json
222
1.47
1.0
0.5
human_gameplay_6.json
206
1.68
1.0
0.5
The analysis of the ”Do something” timestamps in table 3.1 revealed a possible corre­
lation between a high count and a lost game. In won games (1, 2, 4, and 5), the use
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
25
==PAGE:34==
of the ”Do something” token does not seem to show any patterns in mean, median or
mode, indicating that the players adjusted to use to the specific situation of the game.
This is underlined by significantly higher mean intervals between actions, ranging be­
tween [10.39, 23.00], alongside highly varied modes [0.5, 38.0], both measured in seconds.
Such large variance suggests that winning strategies may rely on situational pauses and
calculated timing rather than a fixed repeating pattern. On the other hand, the lost games
(3 and 6) were characterized by a more frequent use of the ”Do something” token, as in
game 3 the count reached 67, paired with a lower mean interval, 7.64 seconds, and an
even lower mode of 3.0 seconds. This suggests that frequent and rapid use of the ”Do
something” token may be indicative of less effective, ”panicked”, or less strategic play
that ultimately correlates with a lost game. This assumption is in accordance with the
observations from 3.3.1 where the players self­reported getting stressed when the ”Do
something” token was placed in front of them and as a result performed a random action
without rationalizing it.
Looking at the game actions analysis in table 3.2, the differences between won and lost
games are miniscule. While for the ”Do something” token, the count was not significantly
lower for lost games, the same cannot be said for game actions, as the losing games have
the two lowest counts of game moves, 221 and 206. However, rather than assuming a
causation relationship where a low count results in a lost game, this should rather be
interpreted as a correlation where lost games do not have the time to perform as many
actions as the won ones. On the other hand, the mean, median or mode time difference
between actions does not appear to be dependent on the winning status of the game.
In conclusion, while 6 games are not enough to draw statistically significant conclusions
from, they indicate that the frequency of use of the ”Do something” token alone does not
have a direct influence on the result of the game. However, it can be hypothesized that
for human games, there exists a threshold of frequency beyond which the use of the ”Do
something” token might have a negative effect on the winning result of the game. At the
same time, the frequency of the actions remains virtually stable across all games, even
with different players and outcomes.
Additionally, for each game, box plots were generated for both ”Do something” token and
game actions timestamp differences and can all be found in appendix B. While the box
plots do not significantly differ for the actions, as table 3.2 would suggest, they do differ
for the ”Do something” tokens.
While both games 4 and 2 resulted in a win and their statistical properties of the ”Do
something” timestamp differences are close to each other as shown in table 3.1, the box
plots differ significantly in the presence of outliers. While game 4 in figure 3.2a does
not have any outliers, game 2 in figure 3.2b shows two outliers, where one is an extreme
outlier. Apart from outliers, both show a similar right­skewed data distribution with similarly
proportioned whiskers.
This further supports the previous observation that the use of the ”Do something” token
has been used situationally rather than with a given frequency that would be deterministic
for the outcome of the game.
Questionnaires
The third and final source of data for evaluating the human gameplay was a structured
questionnaire with quantitative questions focusing on the personal experience of the player.
The questionnaire consisted of 17 questions, all questions and the distribution of their an­
swers can be found in appendix C. The questions could be grouped into several categories
as follows:
26
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:35==
(a) Game 4
(b) Game 2
Figure 3.2: Human game transcription: ”Do something” token timestamp differences
• Player Experience (C.1)
• The ”Do something” token (C.2, C.3, C.4, C.7)
• Stress (C.6, C.12, C.16)
• Blindness (C.8)
• Patience (C.10, C.11)
• Goal prioritization and strategy (C.5, C.9, C.13, C.14, C.17)
• Coordination importance (C.15)
Several key findings include the overwhelming agreement on coordination over individual
plan optimality. As shown in figure 3.3, 92.3% of players prioritized team agreement,
highlighting the social and cooperative nature of the game.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Optimal path is most
important. I don’t care
about others’ plans.
Team agreement is
most important, re­
gardless of optimality.
1
12
Number of Responses
Figure 3.3: How important is optimal individual planning strategy compared to general
agreement on strategy?
Players’ response to stressful situations, such as when a ”Do something” token is placed
in front of them, effectively divided the group into three groups, as can be seen in figure
3.4. While the majority is confident in their plan, two respondents admitted to performing
random and possibly sub­optimal actions under stress. This aligns with the observations
made in section 3.3.1 described in appendix A where players performed nonsensical ac­
tions in a stressful situation. Furthermore, this also supports the assumption made in
section 3.3.1 that a high frequency of use of the ”Do something” tokens has a negative
correlation with the game ending in a win.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
27
==PAGE:36==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Place ”Do something” to­
ken on someone else.
Move whatever I can
move without planning.
Consider the options but
prefer my original plan.
1
2
11
Number of Responses
Figure 3.4: When someone places ”Do something” token in front of me, I:
In the context of Magic Maze, patience is the amount of time an agent waits before placing
a ”Do something” token in front of another player. The self­reported data about patience
from the questionnaire matches the unbiased observations from section 3.3.1. As shown
in figure 3.5, the data has a wide range of distribution, from 3 to 25 seconds and three
clusters could be identified from the data distribution: [3, 4], [5, 10], [20, 25].
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
3
2
3
1
1
2
1
Time (seconds)
Number of Responses
Figure 3.5: How many seconds would you say you wait until you place the ”Do something”
token?
The wide range of self­reported patience aligns with the wide range of means of time
differences between ”Do something” tokens in section 3.3.1. This could point at the as­
sumption that the frequency of use of the ”Do something” token is highly dependent on
the patience of the individual players, due to the large spread in observed data.
In conclusion, the questionnaire results have shown agreement with the previous data
collection methods. Complementing qualitative with quantitative and biased with unbiased
data helps find patterns that repeat across different methods. These are then key for
finding player type variables and defining player types that simulate the human players
as closely as possible.
3.3.2
12 behavioural variables
The three observation methods combined for a complete assessment provide a solid basis
for establishing behavioural variables defining different player strategies. The variables
were chosen based on joined observations that repeated across multiple instances. All
the behavioural variables categorized are as follows:
• Processing Ability: Processing ratio, Processing capacity
• Stressors: Stressed by ”Do Something”, Stressed by low time, Stressed by placing
28
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:37==
”Do Something”
• Placing the ”Do Something”: Patience, Always place ”Do Something”
• Goal Prioritization: Timer sensitivity, Heuristic, Discover until goals
• Reaction to Other Players: Blindness, Stubbornness
Processing Ability
The game observations A.2 and A.5 captured that different players have different ability
to process new information, reflected in the amount of information they can process (pro­
cessing capacity) and the speed at which they can process new information (processing
ratio).
According to Miller [15], the human mind’s immediate memory span is typically limited to
around seven discrete items or ”chunks” of information, plus or minus two. This limitation
significantly impacts the ability to process complex information, such as considering pos­
sible moves to find the optimal strategy. In Magic Maze, the processing capacity of an
agent is limited to 5­9 chunks of information where a chunk is represented by 5 actions,
approximating the number of actions needed to traverse a card. The processing capacity
limits the number of leafs of the agent’s search tree. The paths to sub­goals are only
generated as long as the total length of the paths to the sub­goals does not exceed the
processing capacity. Therefore, two agents with different processing capacity values will
have differently looking search trees as the agent with a lower processing capacity will not
consider as many sub­goals as one with a higher one. This can potentially lead to situa­
tions where agents with larger processing capacity pursue sub­goals that are not present
in other agents’ search trees, introducing a misunderstanding between the agents.
The concept of bounded processing capacity is closely tied with the processing ratio which
determines how quickly the agent processes information and can react to changes in their
environment. To reproduce similar delays in actions as observed in A.2, A.5 and 3.3.1, the
agent’s execution process is intermitted for varying time durations. These durations are
then affected by a processing ratio multiplier making the delays either longer or shorter.
Stressors
While each agent is assigned a starting processing capacity, does not remain unchanged
during the game as cognitive processing ability is impacted by elevated levels of stress.
According to the Yerkes­Dodson Law [16], while lower amounts of stress can enhance
focus, excessive stress leads to a sharp decline in performance, especially during com­
plex tasks. As Magic Maze’s gameplay can be seen as stressful due to the quick pace,
time constraint and simultaneous actions, any additional factors may increase the stress
level past the threshold where stress negatively impacts the processing capacity. This is
also confirmed by the questionnaire, in particular C.16 showing that 38% of players felt
stressed during the game.
To identify sources of stress, we look at the reported answers in C.6 where the most com­
mon sources of stress are: inactivity of other players upon receiving the ”Do something”
token (also observed in A.1, A.6), the timer (also observed in A.5) and the presence of
”Do something” in front of them (also observed in A.5). This is further supported by 69% of
players reported feeling under pressure when the ”Do something” token is placed in front
of them (see C.2). However, 46% reported that their ability to think clearly when having
placed ”Do something” token in front of them is unaffected, 30% worse and 23% better
(see C.4).
These observations result in variables Stressed by ”Do something”, Stressed by low time
and Stressed by placing ”Do something”. If set to true, the player’s processing capac­
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
29
==PAGE:38==
ity decreases when the situation arises. However,it does not remain decreased as it is
re­set to the previous value when the stressing element surpasses. Failure to re­set the
processing capacity back would result in the players eventually having 0 processing ca­
pacity, translating to always having an empty search tree.
Placing the ”Do Something” token
Closely linked to the fact that having a ”Do something” token placed in front of them is the
leading cause of stress in Magic Maze, it is important to consider when the ”Do something”
token is placed. An excessive use of the ”Do something” token as assumed in 3.3.1 can
have a negative impact on the game’s winning result. The difference in when players
use the ”Do something” token was observed in A.6, A.7, A.8 and questioned in C.10,
C.11 and C.12. These show that the players use the ”Do something” token after varying
time of inaction from player j, translating to different rates of patience. Additionally, 30%
of players reported having considered not placing the ”Do something” token in order to
avoid stress.
As a result, two variables are introduced: Patience and Always place ”Do something”. Pa­
tience refers to the number of seconds the agent waits before placing the ”Do something”
token. The number of seconds the agent has waited re­sets when the ”Do something”
token is placed or when a pawn has moved. The ”Do something” token can be placed
repeatedly on agent j while the game state remains unchanged, however it will always be
the player with the lowest patience performing the placement of the ”Do something” to­
ken. The different values for patience have been directly derived from answers to question
C.11.
If the variable Always place ”Do something” is set to false, the probability of that agent
placing the ”Do something” token when the number of seconds waiting has reached the
player’s patience is 50%. Effectively, the agent performs a coin flip whether they will place
the ”Do something” token when they ran out of patience.
Goal Prioritization
Not all players prioritize and identify the sub­goals in the same way, as captured in the
questionnaire (C.5, C.13, C.14, C.17) and the game observations (A.1, A.4, A.6). The dif­
ferent prioritization of goals is also supported by the aforementioned Schelling’s theory of
focal points [14]. The observations align with the theory that situations where focal points
are not harmonized across agents lead to friction and potentially to a lost game. Three
behavioural variables are introduced for goal prioritization: timer sensitivity, heuristic and
discovery until goals.
The variable timer sensitivity corresponds to b in formula 3.1. The growth rate of the
function varies significantly depending b as demonstrated in figure 3.6.
The questionnaire showed that players estimate distance between two tiles in different
ways (C.13). The distance estimation has an effect on the priority of the sub­goals as P
decreases as the distance increases. Two options for heuristics variable were chosen for
the player types: Manhattan and Euclidean.
Both the questionnaire (C.14) and the game observations (A.6) showed that while some
players prefer to discover all cards, others only consider discovering while not all ITEM
GOAL and EXIT GOAL tiles have been discovered. This directly translates to the variable
Discover until goals.
Reaction to Other Players
Players also differ in their ability of noticing other player’s actions and their reaction to
them. This is directly linked to the variables Blindness and Stubbornness and indirectly
connects to the Panic behaviour.
30
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:39==
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
5
10
15
Time left in timer
Utility
2 ∗log2(180
x )
2 ∗log2.5(180
x )
2 ∗log3(180
x )
Figure 3.6: Comparison of logarithmic growth of timer priority across different bases
Blindness in the context of Magic Maze is the inability to notice other player’s actions. This
concept of inattention can be linked back to Schelling’s theory of focal points [14] where
we consider the moving pawns to be a focal point. As observed in A.3 and confirmed with
answers to C.8, players did not always notice a pawn moving when the pawn moved last
is not the same as the one moved second­to­last.
While the majority of players only continues moving a pawn if it is in accordance with
their plan, one person reported continuing the movement even if it does not make sense
to them (C.9). This is also in accordance with observations (A.1, A.3) where a pawn is
moving towards no goal. This is linked to Panic behaviour where an agent i performs a
random action from their action set Ai without it following any rational decision based on
their search tree.
In a reaction to the ”Do something” token, while the majority prefers their original plan,
15% reported moving any pawn without planning (C.3). When an agent i generates a
search tree for each pawn colour and no Anext ∈Ai, they resort to Panic, performing a
random action from Ai. While this behaviour is sub­optimal, it allows for the resolution of
dead­locks where an agent remains idle if they cannot find Anext ∈Ai. A dead­lock where
no actions are performed, eventually resulting in the timer running out, is arguably worse
than performing a sub­optimal action that can be corrected.
As the 84% of players reported preferring their original plan when a ”Do something” token
is placed in front of them (C.3), Stubborn variable was introduced. If set to true, if the agent
i cannot find any Anext ∈Ai, they place the ”Do something” token on a different player
j for which Anext ∈Aj according to i’s search tree. This can result in a loop where two
stubborn agents with different search trees exchange the ”Do something” token between
each other until the timer runs out, since they are both unwilling to change their strategy.
3.3.3
3 player types
Modelling player types in a multi­agent context moves the focus from ’solving the game’
to ’simulating the player’. Building on concepts of experience and agency proposed by
Gray et al. [3], in order for a character to be perceived as human, it must score high
in both experience and agency. Experience is characterized by capacities such as fear,
pleasure, rage or personality while agency includes self­control, planning, communication
and thought. While the capacities of agency could be naturally recognized in an agent
solving a tree search problem, the human qualities must be introduced through player
types derived from behavioural variables. This creates a unique strategic signature for
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
31
==PAGE:40==
each player type that satisfies both experience and agency.
This transforms Magic Maze from a pathfinding problem, finding the optimal solution, to a
problem of implicit coordination of independent agents. As agents do not share the strate­
gies for building their search tree, they must be able to resolve the strategic differences.
This requires a robust coordination logic taking into account non­deterministic behaviour
and diverse play styles of the agents.
Three player types were defined, capturing the different approaches that the players ex­
hibited and were captured during game observations 3.3.1, game transcriptions 3.3.1 and
the questionnaire C. These player types are: Basic, Short fuse, Reactive. Additionally,
a Random player type was added as a baseline for performance comparison. While it is
defined by the same behavioural variables as the other player types, it is not based on
observed player behaviour. Instead, it is configured to perform random actions on random
pawns. Table 3.3 shows the values of variable parameters for each player type.
Table 3.3: AI Player Type Configurations
Variable
REACTIVE
SHORT_FUSE
BASIC
RANDOM
Processing Ratio
0.7
2.0
1.0
1.0
Processing Capacity
6
9
7
0
Stressed by ”Do Something”
False
False
True
False
Stressed by Low Time
False
True
True
False
Stressed by Placing ”Do Something”
False
True
False
False
Timer Sensitivity (Log Base)
3.5
2.5
3.0
3.0
Heuristic Type
1
1
0
0
Discover Until Goals
False
False
True
False
Blindness
3
1
0
0
Stubbornness
False
True
False
False
Patience
20
4
10
1
Always Place ”Do Something”
False
True
True
True
Reactive
The reactive player type is the slowest and most passive one but their processing capacity
remains unchanged during the game, as they do not react negatively to any of the stress­
inducing factors. This type has the lowest sensitivity to the timer, uses Manhattan heuristic
and aims to discover all cards. High blindness causes the agent to overlook moving
pawns. A pawn can be moved up to 3 times before the player notices. This further
plays into the passive nature. In a game with other player types, it never uses the ”Do
something” token due to their high patience.
Short fuse
This player type has the highest processing capacity and ratio. They are the first to react
to a change and are able to process more goals and a larger search tree than any other
player type. They are the most sensitive to the timer from all player types. With a low
but non­zero blindness, they can miss a pawn moving but notice it upon moving for the
second time. They are stubborn, meaning they always prefer their own strategy and when
prompted with ”Do something”, they will never resort to a random action. They are the
least patient of all types and are always the first ones placing the ”Do something” token.
Basic
The Basic player type lies in between the Reactive and Short fuse one, representing an
average player. While it lacks the extreme advantages and disadvantages of the other
types, it has a feature unique to them, only prioritizing discovering new tiles while not all
goals have been discovered.
32
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:41==
4
Experiments
To evaluate the algorithm’s design and the behavioural closeness to human gameplay,
game simulations were conducted, involving different combinations of player types. First,
they were evaluated for the winning rate to find the player type combination with the high­
est one. Then, the transcribed games were analysed and compared to 3.3.1. Finally, the
gameplay was tested against the human gameplay in the form of a behavioural Turing
test. There, people were shown short video clips with parts of the game play that were
either played by 4 AI agents or four human players. For each video clip, the respondents
were asked to estimate whether it is AI or human and state the reason why. These three
methods together constitute a general evaluation of the success of the implementation,
evaluating two different aspects of success: the ability of the AI agents to play a winning
game and the behavioural closeness of the games to human gameplay.
4.1
Objective performance test: Game simulations win rate
To assess the success of algorithm and the combinations of player types, game simula­
tions were run in order to observe the behaviour of different player types and how they
interact with each other. 10 games were ran for each unique combination of the three
player types for a 4­player game (where the order does not matter). Additionally, one set
of 10 games was ran for the Random player type.
The purpose of this experiment was to observe which player types performed well in
combination with each other. Each game was transcribed and saved for later observation,
saving the same information as for the human­played transcribed games: actions and ”Do
something” tokens with timestamps.
4.1.1
Game results
The table 4.1 shows the results of all 16 combinations: 15 combinations of types Basic,
Reactive and Short Fuse, and a game of 4 Random agents. As the action sets Ai assigned
to each agent i in the beginning of the game are randomized and there is no turn order in
the game, the order of the agents in the list is irrelevant.
Overall, the results of the player type configuration test shows dispersed distribution, as
the performance varies significantly depending on the composition. Figure 4.1 shows a
box plot of the distribution of the win rates. The win rate has a large range (0, 90%),
spanning almost the entire spectrum. While 2 player type configurations did not win any
games, there was no configuration that won all games. The distribution is unimodal with
the most occurring win rate being 30%.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
2
1
1
3
2
2
1
1
1
2
0
Win Rate (%)
Frequency
Figure 4.1: Distribution of Success Rates across 16 Experiments
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1: Game simulations: player type configurations results
Agent Configuration
Won
Lost
Win Rate
4 Basic
5
5
50%
4 Reactive
0
10
0%
4 Short Fuse
7
3
70%
4 Random
0
10
0%
3 Basic, 1 Reactive
5
5
50%
3 Basic, 1 Short Fuse
3
7
30%
3 Reactive, 1 Basic
1
9
10%
3 Reactive, 1 Short Fuse
3
7
30%
3 Short Fuse, 1 Basic
9
1
90%
3 Short Fuse, 1 Reactive
8
2
80%
2 Basic, 2 Reactive
4
6
40%
2 Basic, 2 Short Fuse
6
4
60%
2 Reactive, 2 Short Fuse
3
7
30%
2 Basic, Reactive, Short Fuse
4
6
40%
2 Reactive, 1 Basic, 1 Short Fuse
2
8
20%
2 Short Fuse, 1 Basic, 1 Reactive
9
1
90%
The low­performing combinations (0 −40%) are characterized by a two or more players
of Reactive player type (apart from the one run with 4 Random player types). On the
other side, the high­performing ones (80 −90%) are characterized by being a mixture of
different player types with a 2­3 of them being Short Fuse player type. The implication is
however not applicable the other way, since not all games with a high number of players
of Short Fuse type performed well, as a mixture of 2 Reactive and 2 Short Fuse only got
30% success rate.
4.1.2
Possible explanations for win rates
The performance data shows a repeating trend that diversity in agent’s player types sig­
nificantly enhances the team performance. For the homogenous teams, the Short Fuse
had the highest win rate, likely due to their proactive nature, high processing capacity and
ratio. Some of the games that homogenous Short Fuse team lost ended in a dead­lock
situation likely due to their Stubbornness. On the other hand, Reactive and Random ho­
mogenous teams performed very poorly and did not manage to win a single game. For
the Random type, this was the expected outcome since they were performing random
actions and had no sense of purpose or goal. They managed to discover at most 4 cards
in a game which is unsatisfactory for winning the game. The fail rate of the Reactive
player type can be, exactly opposite to the Short Fuse one, explained by the relative low
processing capacity and ratio. The pace of the game was very slow due to their very high
patience of 20 and processing ratio 0.7. Additionally because of them having the high­
est log base for the timer sensitivity, many games ended prematurely because the timer
sub­goal was prioritized too late. Lastly for homogenous teams, the Basic one performed
with a mid­range success rate of 50%, suggesting that while being reliable, it lacks the
urgency and speed.
The best outcomes were consistently observed in teams with a high ratio of Short Fuse
player types mixed with at least one other type. Specifically, the configurations 3 Short
Fuse, 1 Basic and 2 Short Fuse, 1 Basic, 1 Reactive achieved the highest observed win
34
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:43==
rate of 90% win rate. This suggests that the Short Fuse agent acts as a prompt for quick
pace. Low patience of 4 causes the frequent use of ”Do something” token on other player
types, preventing the team from long waiting pauses observed in Reactive homogenous
teams. In these high­performing mixed teams, the Basic and Reactive agents provide the
necessary steady path execution preventing the deadlocks that homogenous Short Fuse
team experienced.
The inability of the Reactive player type to perform successfully in a team where this player
type is present in majority while being part of the best performing team could be linked
with the Köhler Effect. This psychology concept suggests that in a team with players of
varying abilities, the less capable or more passive players usually perform better because
they are getting pushed by the more active players [17]. This explanation extends per
proxy onto the human players who were the inspiration for the Reactive player type.
4.2
Objective performance test: Game aspects statistics
Additionally to looking at the win rate, the games were also compared to the human tran­
scribed games on the criteria those were evaluated in 3.3.1. For each recorded game
played by AI agents, the count, median, mean and mode time difference were calculated
for actions and ”Do something” tokens. Since each player type combination was ran for
10 games, the measurements of central tendency were calculated for each game and
then averaged across the 10 games.
4.2.1
Game actions comparison
Table 4.2 displays the values obtained for game action timestamps for each combination
of player types. The names are abbreviated to B (Basic), R (Reactive) and SF (Short
Fuse). The three best performing player type combinations are in italic. While for all
human games, count of game actions was between 206 and 298, same cannot be said
for the AI games. Only five out of 15 player combinations had both mean and median
within that range, visualized in figure 4.2.
Table 4.2: AI gameplay: Game actions timestamps statistics
Agent Configuration
Mean
Median
Mean Time Median Time Mode Time
Count
Count
Diff (s)
Diff (s)
Diff (s)
4B
299.5
319.5
1.35
1.03
1.2
4R
139.1
150.5
3.78
1.86
7.23
4SF
340.0
285.0
0.74
0.58
0.51
3B 1R
227.8
272.5
1.63
1.1
1.09
3B 1SF
326.6
319.0
0.89
0.67
0.89
3R 1B
172.9
184.5
2.67
1.34
1.45
3R 1SF
175.6
139.0
2.78
0.88
1.31
3SF 1B
318.6
265.0
0.74
0.64
0.66
3SF 1R
250.8
270.5
1.15
0.62
0.7
2B 2R
220.0
218.0
1.77
1.16
1.26
2B 2SF
343.9
325.0
0.86
0.62
0.62
2R 2SF
279.4
298.5
1.7
0.7
0.65
2B 1R 1SF
255.2
263.0
1.0
0.7
0.88
2R 1B 1SF
283.8
260.0
1.06
0.79
0.99
2SF 1B 1R
302.3
323.0
0.87
0.67
0.6
The large difference between the average game actions count is largely influenced by the
number of won games. The games with the lowest mean and median count (4R, 3R 1B,
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
35
==PAGE:44==
4B
4R
4SF
3B 1R
3B 1SF
3R 1B
3R 1SF
3SF 1B
3SF 1R
2B 1R 1SF
2R 1B 1SF
2SF 1B 1R
2B 2R
2B 2SF
2R 2SF
0
100
200
300
400
AI Player Types
Count
Mean Count
Median Count
Human min (206)
Human max (298)
Figure 4.2: AI Game actions: Mean and Median Counts
3R 1SF) had some of the lowest win rates (0%, 10% and 30% respectively).
The time difference between the actions is however most probably independent from the
end result and instead, dependent on the configuration of the player types involved. The
human observations had a stable median (1.0 in vast majority) and mode (0.5 for all)
across observations from different players and different winning outcomes while having a
varying mean (from 1.36 to 2.49). The time differences for AI compared to humans are
plotted in figure 4.3.
For the three best­performing player type configurations, all values of mean, median and
mode fell between the human observed values for median and mode, however only 2SF
1B 1R had mean > median > mode, like observed by human gameplay. Overall, this
comparison showed almost all player types falling very close to values observed in human
gameplay, with the only exception of the player type combination of 4 Reactive players.
As expected, their time difference between each action was significantly higher due to low
processing capacity and ratio.
4.2.2
”Do something” comparison
The table displaying the results for ”Do something” token counts and time differences can
be seen in table 4.3. The values were compared with the human observations captured in
3.1. The range of the number of ”Do something” tokens placed during human gameplay
is from 15 to 67. While being a relatively wide range, the AI games had an even higher
range of median count 7 to 242.5 with the homogenous teams of Reactive and Short
Fuse players being on each side of the extreme. None of the 3 most successful player
types were within the range of the human game play observations. Only 3 player type
combinations’ median count fell within the range (3B 1SF, 3R 1B, 2B 2R), however these
player combinations only achieved 30­50% win rate.
36
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:45==
4B
4R
4SF
3B 1R
3B 1SF
3R 1B
3R 1SF
3SF 1B
3SF 1R
2B 1R 1SF
2R 1B 1SF
2SF 1B 1R
2B 2R
2B 2SF
2R 2SF
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
AI Player Types
Time Difference (s)
Mean Time Diff.
Median Time Diff.
Mode Time Diff.
Human median
Human mode
Human mean min
Human mean max
Figure 4.3: AI Game Moves: Mean, Median and Mode Time difference
Table 4.3: AI gameplay: Do something timestamps statistics
Agent Configuration
Mean
Median
Mean Time Median Time Mode Time
Count
Count
Diff (s)
Diff (s)
Diff (s)
4B
58.6
27.0
9.98
7.22
7.13
4R
40.0
7.0
44.3
30.59
30.08
4SF
479.1
242.5
1.55
0.77
0.26
3B 1R
89.2
39.5
6.79
4.88
2.46
3B 1SF
61.4
53.0
4.86
3.1
9.22
3R 1B
22.7
21.0
21.37
15.96
21.4
3R 1SF
97.7
103.0
3.92
3.96
2.08
3SF 1B
374.4
142.5
1.42
0.64
0.49
3SF 1R
167.3
145.5
1.4
0.44
0.46
2B 2R
262.6
30.5
12.55
7.77
5.17
2B 2SF
203.1
146.0
2.14
1.14
0.75
2R 2SF
279.5
204.0
1.38
0.89
0.33
2B 1R 1SF
83.4
76.0
3.92
3.08
2.62
2R 1B 1SF
92.1
84.0
4.22
2.48
2.33
2SF 1B 1R
237.8
169.0
1.37
0.56
0.66
Overall, the number of ”Do something” tokens used during the games of successful player
combinations was multiple times larger than those in human game play, with significantly
lower time difference in between. This is most probably caused by the very low patience
of the Short Fuse player type which is present in all 3 best performing games.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3
Subjective performance test: Human or AI
The last method’s objective was to evaluate the ability of the AI agents to simulate human
behaviour so that AI gameplay is indistinguishable from human gameplay. People were
asked to evaluate a series of 18 short video clips of length varying between 8 to 21 sec­
onds. Each clip showed either a transcribed human gameplay, or AI gameplay. All video
clips of the AI gameplay were either of the configuration of 4 Random players or (2 Short
Fuse, 1 Reactive and 1 Basic). The purpose of the Random game play was to establish
a baseline as the Random players play significantly worse than any other, humans or AI.
This evaluation is a variation of a Turing test. The original Turing test, proposed by Alan
Turing is a benchmark to determine whether a machine can be distinguished from a hu­
man. In a typical setup, a human engages in a conversation through a text interface with
two parties. They know that one is a machine and one is human, but they do not know
which one. If the person cannot reliably distinguish between them only based on the text
conversation, the machine has passed the test. [18].
While this version of Turing test also involves distinguishing machine from human, it varies
on multiple levels. Firstly, rather than interacting with the machine through text, the partic­
ipants evaluate pre­selected short videos. Secondly, instead of an A­or­B test where the
participants would only choose machine or human, they are asked to answer on a scale
for each video clip. This also incorporates their confidence, differentiating a correct and
very confident answer from a correct but not very confident one.
For each of the video clips, the participants were asked to answer on a scale from 1 to 7
(1 = Definitely AI, 7 = Definitely human) how confident they are in the video clip capturing
either AI or human gameplay. They were then asked to reason for their decision. The
evaluation was gradual with regard to their confidence. The score calculation for every
question was calculated in the following way:
Score = 1 −
(1
3 × |G −C|
)
(4.1)
where G is the guessed answer and C is the correct answer. For example, if the clip
showed AI gameplay, C = 1. For G = 2, Score = 2/3, while for G = 5, Score = −1/3.
The more confident the respondent was in their answer, the bigger either the reward or
the punishment. The middle value G = 4 results in not losing or gaining any points and
Score = 0. Overall, the possible total score for the 18 questions is the sum of all individual
scores and ranges from ­18 to 18.
4.3.1
Chosen video clips
All 18 video clips that were chosen to be part of the evaluation can bee seen in a YouTube
playlist at https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLuzIKbN1kd1mSa5YTastI0oAacX85vPV7&si=
o2Nthl9L1CEN-XVD. The ratio of human and AI video clips was chosen to be 8 human, 8
best­performing AI, 2 random moves AI.
The video clips were chosen to cover different scenarios. The purpose of including the
algorithm performing random moves was to serve as a baseline, as the hypothesis being
evaluated was that random moves can be distinguished as AI with higher success rate
than the best­performing AI. The reason for choosing the player type combination (2 Short
Fuse, 1 Reactive and 1 Basic) for this test was the highest achieved success rate of 90%
for winning simulated game, together with the largest diversity of player types.
38
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:47==
The 18 video clips could be categorized into groups with a common behavioural trait or
situation of the game. The list below includes the categorization together with a short
description of each video and whether it is human, AI or random actions. The numbers in
the list correspond to the numbers of these clips in the questionnaire, and the YouTube
playlist.
• Timers flipping:
1. Human: green pawn stepping on a timer too soon (34 seconds remaining),
2. AI: yellow pawn going back­and­forth because of different timer prioritization,
3. Random: purple pawn stepping on a timer way too soon (112 seconds remain­
ing).
• Discovery with multiple pawns:
4. Human: 3 pawns simultaneously moving and discovering,
5. AI: 3 pawns simultaneously moving and discovering.
• Lost game:
6. Human: timer ran out.
• Irrational moves:
7. AI: orange pawn making moves without intention,
8. Human: illogical moves, immediately corrected.
• Pawn conflict resolution:
9. AI: yellow pawn moves out of pay for orange pawn who continues to sub­goals,
10. AI: triple conflict resolution with orange and purple pawns vortexing away to
clear way for green pawn.
• Unresolved pawn conflict:
11. Human: action silence upon conflict, then non­optimal resolution,
12. Human: yellow pawn introducing conflict by following a narrow path to no sub­
goal.
• Move another pawn upon empty search tree:
13. AI: green discovers last sub­goal for green, then yellow pawn moves.
• Back­and­forth:
14. AI: grenn pawn moving from and to sub­goal because of different timer priori­
tization,
15. Human: purple moves onto orange pawn’s current discovery sub­goal, imme­
diately corrected.
• Multiple pawns moving at the same time:
16. Human: orange, green and yellow pawn moving, not all optimally,
17. Random: orange, purple and green moving in nonsensical way.
• ”Do something” silence
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
39
==PAGE:48==
18. AI: after phase 1 ends, no pawns move and only ”Do something” token is used.
4.3.2
Quantitative results
The videos were assessed by 6 people. All answers, both numerical and the reasoning
for each answer, can be found in appendix D. The numerical answers, G, together with
the scores for each answer, total score for each participant and average score across all
participants were calculated and are shown in table 4.4. The names of the respondents
have been abbreviated to maintain the anonymity of the respondents.
Table 4.4: Survey Results: AI or human
Q#
C
J
I
M
G
B
Z
Avg.
G
Score
G
Score
G
Score
G
Score
G
Score
G
Score
Score
1
7
5
0.33
6
0.67
3
­0.33
5
0.33
4
0.00
3
­0.33
0.11
2
1
2
0.67
5
­0.33
5
­0.33
4
0.00
2
0.67
6
­0.67
0.00
3
1
6
­0.67
3
0.33
5
­0.33
6
­0.67
2
0.67
2
0.67
0.00
4
7
6
0.67
2
­0.67
5
0.33
6
0.67
3
­0.33
5
0.33
0.17
5
1
4
0.00
5
­0.33
4
0.00
3
0.33
5
­0.33
4
0.00
­0.06
6
7
5
0.33
4
0.00
6
0.67
6
0.67
5
0.33
4
0.00
0.33
7
1
3
0.33
6
­0.67
3
0.33
6
­0.67
4
0.00
5
­0.33
­0.17
8
7
2
­0.67
4
0.00
3
­0.33
6
0.67
1
­1.00
3
­0.33
­0.28
9
1
6
­0.67
5
­0.33
6
­0.67
2
0.67
4
0.00
4
0.00
­0.17
10
1
6
­0.67
2
0.67
6
­0.67
2
0.67
3
0.33
3
0.33
0.11
11
7
5
0.33
6
0.67
3
­0.33
6
0.67
6
0.67
3
­0.33
0.28
12
7
2
­0.67
3
­0.33
5
0.33
5
0.33
2
­0.67
4
0.00
­0.17
13
1
2
0.67
7
­1.00
6
­0.67
3
0.33
4
0.00
5
­0.33
­0.17
14
1
2
0.67
5
­0.33
2
0.67
6
­0.67
1
1.00
2
0.67
0.34
15
7
2
­0.67
5
0.33
5
0.33
5
0.33
2
­0.67
3
­0.33
­0.11
16
7
6
0.67
6
0.67
6
0.67
5
0.33
4
0.00
3
­0.33
0.34
17
1
1
1.00
2
0.67
2
0.67
5
­0.33
1
1.00
3
0.33
0.56
18
1
2
0.67
5
­0.33
5
­0.33
6
­0.67
7
­1.00
3
0.33
­0.22
Total Score
2.33
­0.33
0.00
3.00
0.67
­0.33
0.89
*G = Guessed answer (1­7), C = Correct answer (1­7), Avg. Score = Row­wise mean of normalized scores.
As the table 4.4 shows, the total scores of all respondents of the survey ranged between
(−0.33, 3.00) with the average score being 0.89. It is important to note that as only 6
people responded to this questionnaire, it is not a high enough count to be statistically
significant. However, the overall results for all respondents show that nobody was able
to, not entirely or even in majority, accurately recognize the human gameplay from the
AI gameplay. For two of the respondents who achieved a final score of −0.33, a random
chance of guessing for each answer would have yielded a better expected score of 0, as
the average amount of points one could get from each question is 0, due to the negative
points awarded for wrong answer. With half of the people going worse or as bad score as
random guesses, that strongly suggests that they were not able to tell which clip was AI
and which was human.
The experience with the game of the respondents varied and included some who have
played the game on more than 5 occasions. The most experienced respondent (I) was
also one of the two with the lowest score. This suggests that more experience with the
game does not guarantee a more accurate evaluation of the video clips.
For each question, the received points ranged from ­1 to 1. The question that on aver­
age received the most correct and confident answers was number 17, showing a random
gameplay, with average of 0.56 points. This aligns with the idea that the random game­
play establishes a baseline for the test. The other random gameplay video in question
number 3 got 0.00, meaning that all 6 respondents in total were indifferent and exactly
between deciding for AI or human. In total, 8 questions received an average negative
40
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:49==
score: questions 5 (AI), 7 (AI), 8 (human), 9 (AI), 12 (human), 13 (AI), 15 (human) and 18
(AI).
To evaluate the most common mistakes, we must distinguish wrongly labelling AI as hu­
man from wrongly labelling human as AI, and same for correct labelling. Following inspi­
ration from confusion matrices used to evaluate binary classification in machine learning,
each answer was marked as TP (true positive), TN (true negative), FP (false positive)
or FN (false negative) as shown in table 4.5. This evaluation disregards the degree of
confidence that was included in the previous analysis. Note that answers with Score = 0
are not assign any label. The translated table is shown in table 4.6.
Table 4.5: Confusion Matrix Framework
Perceived as AI
Perceived as Human
(Score > 0)
(Score < 0)
Actual AI (C = 1)
True Positive (TP)
False Negative (FN)
Actual Human (C = 7)
False Positive (FP)
True Negative (TN)
Table 4.6: Survey Results: AI or human classified as TN, TP, FN, FP
Q#
C
J
I
M
G
B
Z
mode
1
7
TN
TN
FP
TN
–
FP
TN
2
1
TP
FN
FN
–
TP
FN
FN
3
1
FN
TP
FN
FN
TP
TP
FN, TP
4
7
TN
FP
TN
TN
FP
TN
TN
5
1
–
FN
–
TP
FN
–
–
6
7
TN
–
TN
TN
TN
–
TN
7
1
TP
FN
TP
FN
–
FN
FN
8
7
FP
–
FP
TN
FP
FP
FP
9
1
FN
FN
FN
TP
–
–
FN
10
1
FN
TP
FN
TP
TP
TP
TP
11
7
TN
TN
FP
TN
TN
FP
TN
12
7
FP
FP
TN
TN
FP
–
FP
13
1
TP
FN
FN
TP
–
FN
FN
14
1
TP
FN
TP
FN
TP
TP
TP
15
7
FP
TN
TN
TN
FP
FP
FP, TN
16
7
TN
TN
TN
TN
–
FP
TN
17
1
TP
TP
TP
FN
TP
TP
TP
18
1
TP
FN
FN
FN
FN
TP
FN
To identify the most common mistakes, and the most common correctly identified video
types, each type of answer (TP, TN, FP or FN) was counted and summarized. The table
4.7 presents the count of each answer type, separating the observations into two tables,
where table 4.7a includes all questions, and the table 4.7b excludes questions 17 and 3
with random gameplay. While both human and well­performing AI was represented by 8
clips, therefore should contain 48 answers each, the neutral answers were not counted in
this overview and that is the reason for the discrepancy.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 4.7: Confusion Matrix: AI or Human Gameplay
(a) All Video Clips
Predicted
AI
Human
Total
Actual
AI
30 (TP)
19 (FN)
49
Human
21 (FP)
25 (TN)
46
Total
51
44
95
(b) Excluding Random Agents
Predicted
AI
Human
Total
Actual
AI
22 (TP)
15 (FN)
37
Human
21 (FP)
25 (TN)
46
Total
43
40
83
Overall, the correctly identified video clips outweigh the wrongly identified ones. The ac­
curacy, the rate of correctly identified ones, compared to the total count of inquiries, stands
at (22+25)
83
≈0.566 , leaving 43.4% wrongly identified. This result is comparable to random
guesses, strongly suggesting that the chosen AI video clips were virtually indistinguish­
able from the human ones by the participants.
4.3.3
Qualitative results
Respondents were asked to reason for each numeric answer with verbal assessment.
Some gave similar reasoning for multiple video clips, recognizing emerging patterns. It
is interesting to note that some of the answers mentioned patterns that were implicitly
implemented by the player types. An example of this is ”Feels like up and/or down were
sleeping here.” as an explanation why the respondent thought this clip was of human
gameplay, while being AI. This video clip showed the aftermath of the Reactive player
having a lower processing power and therefore not reacting to the updating state of the
game as quickly as the other players of different player types. It is important to note that
while the respondents were aware that some of those clips were AI, they did not have any
knowledge about the algorithms used or how the system operates.
Some of the respondents were able to pick up on the same behavioural patterns as were
implemented in the player archetypes. These behaviours were identified for both human
gameplay and AI gameplay, suggesting perceived similarity. These behaviours include:
• Irrational actions,
• Good cooperation while moving one pawn,
• Effective resolving of pawn conflicts through vortex,
• Slow or fast actions,
• Pause after reaching a sub­goal,
• Inactivity of one agent,
• Frequent use of ”Do something token”,
• ”Do something” token immediately followed by a player performing an action,
• Switch of focus to another pawn when no more sub­goals,
• Corrected actions as change of mind,
• Panic upon repeatedly receiving ”Do something” token,
42
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:51==
• Stubbornness and inactivity upon ”Do something” token.
The qualitative assessment showed, that while sometimes, AI was associated with pos­
itive and human with negative attributes, other times it was the other way around. The
list below presents the words or phrases associated with AI or human play. They were
all taken from the qualitative assessment for reasoning and while the adjectives and de­
scriptions were isolated, they remained as close to the original wording as possible.
• Associated with AI:
– Positive:
* Fast
* Effective
* Rapid sequence of actions
* Very coordinated
– Negative:
* Illogical moves, inexplicable moves, a bunch of weird moves, illogical and
random
* Compared to beginner players
* Too random to be human
* Compared untrained AI to humans misunderstanding the rules
* Not using the red light thingy (”Do something” token)
* Ineffective move to the timer
* Uneventful
* Insistent and not cooperating
• Associated with humans:
– Positive:
* Nicely coordinated
* Focused at one task at a time
– Negative:
* Chaos
* A lot of ”Do something” token
* Slow
* Strategy misalignment
* Stubborn, insistent
* Panic
* Confused
* Stressed
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
43
==PAGE:52==
While the words used to describe actions that were believed to be human are associ­
ated with feelings (panic, confused, stressed, stubborn), the words associated with AI are
more descriptive of the actions being performed and the algorithms (untrained, ineffective,
illogical, random, inexplicable).
This phenomena was described by Gray, Gray and Wegner [3]. They identify two distinct
dimensions through which humans perceive minds: experience and agency. The expe­
rience is associated with sensations and feelings, while the agency is associated with
logical thought or planning. While humans typically have both experience and agency, AI
and robots lack experience and are associated with high agency. The words used to de­
scribe humans were associated with feelings: stressed, stubborn, confused; while those
associated with agency, such as ineffective or illogical were used when describing AI.
Often times, these associations were wrong, for example while the reasoning for their
choice was ”Too random to be human”, it was indeed human gameplay. Likewise, some
clips that were estimated to be human gameplay described using feelings, captured AI
gameplay. This shows successful implementation of human sensations and experiences
that mimics the human gameplay and is indistinguishable to humans.
The confused, stressed and panicked describes the same behaviour for humans, as inef­
fective, illogical and random describes for AI. That points to some people associating this
negative behaviour with humans, while other associate the same behaviour with AI. This
comes down to the person’s own experiences with the game and personal beliefs about
AI and human performance.
44
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:53==
5
Conclusion and Discussions
Magic Maze is a real­time collaborative board game where players must achieve a com­
mon goal with restricted communication and distributed responsibilities under time stress.
Due to the randomness in the order of unrevealed cards, the number of combinatorial pos­
sibilities of adding them to the existing board and the growing space for the four pawns
to move around the discovered area, the game has a large state space, found to have an
upper bound at 1031. The search tree exploring all possibilities from the intimal state s0
would have a factor of up to 12 at each node due to a large number of applicable actions
for each state of the game. It would also have a significant depth if the tree was capturing
the entire game from beginning to the end.
In order to develop an AI agent that would be able to solve the search problem, adjust­
ments and simplifications had to be implemented, as the standard search methods of DFS
or BFS are not suitable for such a large state space. The game was therefore translated
from a global search problem into a series of multiple local searches by shifting the search
horizon to a sub­goal. This hierarchical planning approach decomposes the achievement
of the goal state condition into a series of sub­goals that directly or indirectly contribute to
the goal. Furthermore, only the shortest paths to each of these sub­goals are generated
using enhanced A* search, further limiting the size of each search tree. This search tree
allows the agent to find and perform best actions by locating the tree branch leading to the
leaf with the highest priority. By implementing forward induction, it also allows the agent
to rationalize the actions of other players, regardless of the actions’ optimality.
The AI agents communicate with each other through public announcements, including
information about the updated state of the game. As a reaction to these public announce­
ments, each agent updates their search tree to match the information provided. In the
case of the ”Do something” token, the information communicated with this public an­
nouncement is very limited and requires the teammates to rationalize and understand
the agent’s strategy and intent.
Not only do the agents have to be able to successfully achieve the goal state and win
the game. The purpose of this research was to develop AI agents who could mimic hu­
man behaviour observed in the gameplay of Magic Maze. Agents mimicking not only the
behaviour of individual agents, but also the interactions that players have between each
other, results in agents that are collaboratively believable. As human gameplay is not
perfect or optimal and often includes mistakes, the AI agents must balance believability
with the ability to successfully finish the game and achieve the goal state.
Through qualitative observations of gameplay, quantitive analysis of human gameplay
transcriptions and questionnaires asking the players to self­evaluate the strategies, feel­
ings and personal experiences, 12 behavioural variables were deduced. These behavioural
variables are the defining characteristics of the human players that distinguish them from
each other. They cover different aspects from sub­goal prioritization, patience and blind­
ness to processing ability and stress inducing situations. The observations outlined three
different player types that act as archetypes that a player could be characterized by. Each
player type is defined by a unique combination of the 12 behavioural variables. The de­
fined player types are Short Fuse, Basic and Reactive, creating two agents with extreme
behaviours and one (Basic) representing a middle ground between them.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
45
==PAGE:54==
The performance and collaborative ability of these three player types was assessed using
objective qualitative performance testing. 10 game simulations were run for each unique
combination of the three player types. This test revealed the collaborative properties that
get outlined when different player types are mixed together. A combination of all three
player types outperformed any homogenous team consisting of four players of the same
player type. That shows that the different strategies of the player types combined in a
game outperform a homogenous team where all agents’ strategies align due to being of
the same player type. The most successful combination was (2 Short Fuse, 1 Basic, 1
Reactive) achieving winning 9 out of 10 games.
The analysis of the temporal distribution of the actions taken during the simulated games
with the most successful player type combinations showed to be within the range of the
observed and previously analysed human games. The mean, median and mode differ­
ence between game actions in the AI game simulations all lied between the median and
mode time differences observed in the human games.
The implementation of the game logic and UI, AI agents, and all the game records of both
human and AI games, together with the analysis can be found at https://github.com/
304125/MagicMaze.
The final evaluation concentrated on the believability of the AI agents and their interac­
tions. To provide both quantitative and qualitative evaluations, 18 video clips were taken
capturing either a short 8­20 second clip of a human gameplay, best­performing AI game­
play, or a gameplay of agents performing random actions. Each respondent was asked to
evaluate each video clip on a scale from 1­7 expressing whether they think it is showing
AI or human gameplay, allowing for a confidence score. Each answer was then evalu­
ated and scored from ­1 to 1, deducting points for wrong answers and awarding points
for correct answers, with respect to the confidence of the respondent. The final score of
each respondent was then on a scale from ­18 to 18. Average final score across all ques­
tions and all respondents was 0.89 and all respondents scored in the range (−0.33, 3.00).
This shows that while some respondents scored negatively and would have had a better
expected result if they answered completely on random, the highest score was not over­
whelmingly better. This shows that some respondents are not successful in identifying AI
from human gameplay, and those that are, do not answer with high confidence.
Disregarding the confidence and only evaluating the answers either as correct or incorrect,
only 56.6% of answers were correctly identifying AI as AI, or human as human gameplay,
leaving 43.4% wrongly identified. This result is very close a random guess correspond­
ing to a coin flip, showing inability of the respondents to distinguish the AI from human
gameplay with confidence and precision.
Additional, the reasoning of the respondents for their choice of either AI or human showed
a trend that clips assumed to be human were described using sensations and feelings,
such as panic, stress and confusion, while those assumed to be AI were described using
words such as untrained, ineffective or illogical which are associated with agency rather
than feelings. Some of those video clips believed to show human gameplay and therefore
described using human feelings were in actuality gameplay of the AI agents. This proves
the success of the modelled behavioural variables and the player types simulating the
observed human behaviour.
This thesis demonstrated that in a large state space of real­time coordination tasks, a hy­
brid approach that combines tree­based search with simulated behavioural variables de­
rived from human gameplay successfully achieves the goal of developing AI agents that
46
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:55==
are both, successful in solving the search problem, and being virtually unrecognizable
from human agents. Variables defining the different behavioural aspects were success­
fully identified, leading to definition of player types. The implementation and coordination
of these player types in simulated games showed high success in winning ratio, close­
ness in observed parameters to the human gameplay, together with successful deception
of experienced players, identifying the AI gameplay as human.
5.1
Future work
While the three defined player types performed well as a team in both aspects, more
player types could be experimented with in the future. Due to the large number of vari­
ables identified, combinations and morphs of player types could be experimented with to
observe what variables have the most influence on which aspects of the game. This could
then lead to a more refined, less extreme player types, who would still be able to maintain
a high winning success.
Additionally, more experiments and evaluations should be conducted to confirm the inabil­
ity to distinguish between human and AI gameplay. Since the final evaluation was only
performed by 6 people, that is not enough to draw statistical conclusions from, and more
experiments would need to be concluded, for the data to be statistically significant.
Lastly, experiments that would be closer to a Turing test, than the performed ones, could
be conducted, where a human is playing the game, rather than observing a previously
played one. Based on the gameplay, they could evaluate whether they think they inter­
acted with humans or AI agents. This would show additional quality of the AI of not only
being able to collaborate with other AI agents, but with humans too. Conclusions from
this gameplay could then be utilized to identify the human’s estimated player type, based
on their compatibility with the AI player types. The identification of human’s player type
could be used for creating balanced teams consisting of different player types with a high
expected probability of winning in combination together.
This could then serve as a basis and inspiration for application on other team­based col­
laborative real­time games with limited communication. Suggestion of more optimal team
division could help improve the success of the teams by creating groups of people whose
player estimated types are compatible and complementary to each other.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Georgios N. Yannakakis and Julian Togelius. Artificial Intelligence and Games. Springer,
2018.
[2]
Allan Dafoe et al. “Cooperative AI”. In: Nature 593.7857 (2021), pp. 33–36.
[3]
Heather M Gray, Kurt Gray, and Daniel M Wegner. “Dimensions of mind perception”.
In: Science 315.5812 (2007), pp. 619–619.
[4]
Martin J. Osborne. An Introduction to Game Theory. New York, NY: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 2004. ISBN: 978­0195128956.
[5]
Hans van Ditmarsch, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi. Dynamic Epistemic
Logic. Vol. 337. Synthese Library. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[6]
Ronald Fagin et al. Reasoning About Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
[7]
Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 4th.
Hoboken, NJ: Pearson, 2020. ISBN: 978­0134610993.
[8]
Steven M. LaValle. Planning Algorithms. Available at http://planning.cs.uiuc.edu/.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2006. URL: http://planning.cs.uiuc.
edu/.
[9]
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk”. In: Econometrica 47.2 (1979), pp. 263–291.
[10]
Yoav Shoham and Moshe Tennenholtz. “On social laws for artificial agent societies:
off­line design”. In: Artificial Intelligence 73.1 (1995). Computational Research on
Interaction and Agency, Part 2, pp. 231–252. ISSN: 0004­3702. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/0004-3702(94)00007-N. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/000437029400007N.
[11]
Elon Kohlberg and Jean­Francois Mertens. “On the Strategic Stability of Equilibria”.
In: Econometrica 54.5 (1986), pp. 1003–1037.
[12]
Pierpaolo Battigalli and Marciano Siniscalchi. “Strong Belief and Forward Induction
Reasoning”. In: Journal of Economic Theory 106.2 (2002), pp. 356–391.
[13]
Anand S. Rao and Michael P. Georgeff. “Modeling Rational Agents within a BDI­
Architecture”. In: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Multi­
Agent Systems. 1991, pp. 312–319.
[14]
Thomas C. Schelling. The Strategy of Conflict. Harvard University Press, 1960.
[15]
George A Miller. “The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our
capacity for processing information”. In: Psychological review 63.2 (1956), pp. 81–
97.
[16]
Robert M. Yerkes and John D. Dodson. “The relation of strength of stimulus to rapid­
ity of habit­formation”. In: Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology 18.5
(1908), pp. 459–482.
[17]
Norbert L. Kerr and Guido Hertel. “The Köhler Group Motivation Gain: How to Mo­
tivate the ’Weak’ Link in a Group”. In: Social and Personality Psychology Compass
5.1 (2011), pp. 43–55.
[18]
Alan M. Turing. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence”. In: Mind 59.236 (1950),
pp. 433–460.
48
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:57==
A
Human game observation records
A.1
Game 01
Participants:
Player T, Player G, Player M, Player K
Game Result:
Lose
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• Slow beginning
• Moving a pawn to no goal ? (many times)
• Time almost ran out before first flip but managed
• One hero went to goal too early
• Heroes stuck in the middle of ”walk”
• The team does not seem to move more than 2 heroes at a time
• Moving one way in a narrow corridor, then going back after realizing it’s blind
• A lot of pointing
• Continued moving the last moved pawn without thinking where to
• Some didn’t notice time running out
Players often performed actions without rational reason behind them. Reaction to ”Do
something” token resulted in irrational actions within the player’s action set. While some
players were aware of the timer running out, some did not prioritize it or notice it.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Timer sensitivity
Link: Each player prioritized timer as a sub­goal to pursue next at different times
due to different notion of urgency
Variable: Stressed by the ”Do something” token
Link: Players performed irrational actions under the pressure of the ”Do something”
token placed in front of them
A.2
Game 02
Participants:
Player T, Player G, Player M, Player K
Game Result:
Lose
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• A lot of ’silent’ moments with no actions taken
• Conflict coordination with a narrow path and blocking pawn
• Conflict handled on­optimally (natural and easy to do one­follow­another)
• Stressful ”Do something” token when 2 players noticed running out of time
• The only player who could move the pawn to timer did not see it
• Chaos and silence after stealing items and time to exit
• Everybody paused and was looking for exits
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
49
==PAGE:58==
Players seemed to have learned from the previous game. Same issues with inability to
pay attention to the timer by an individual. Present moments of action silence where no
actions are performed and all agents are processing.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Processing Ratio
Link: Some players were able to evaluate situations quicker than others
A.3
Game 03
Participants:
Player T, Player G, Player M, Player K
Game Result:
Win
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• A lot of non verbal communication ­ body language, noises
• Better coordination for singular heroes
• When a hero starts moving, the team continues moving
• No obvious conflicts
• Most often conflict: people just don’t see it
• Vortex power makes it confusing because of no ”trace”
Players added: Sometimes I don’t know what the goal actually is, I just continue
the hero’s movement. This has lead to irrational situations and decision following
a one­way blind path with no goal in the end. I don’t always notice when someone
moves another pawn then what was previously moving.
Notes
Player Type Impact
Variable: Blindness
Link: Some players showed blindness to the last moving pawn where they do not
notice it, while others always react to the last moving pawn.
A.4
Game 04
Participants:
Player A, Player L, Player O, Player J
Game Result:
Lose
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• 3/4 never played before
• Issues understanding the rules (vortex)
• Moving pawns using actions that were not theirs
• Time ran out mid­way through
• Two players did not notice the timer soon enough
• Vocal players (yey, naaa)
50
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:59==
New players making mistakes regarding rules caused chaos during the game. Game had
to be paused mid­way to clarify the rules.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Timer sensitivity
Link: Some players only paid attention to the timer when it was about to run out
resulting in lost.
A.5
Game 05
Participants:
Player A, Player L, Player O, Player J
Game Result:
Win
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• One player only passive: only doing stuff upon ”Do something” token
• Breaking rules by pointing
• L using ”Do something” token very often on J
• every time J needs to ”Do something” token, L puts ”Do something” token in
front of them
• J does not move unless ”Do something” token is placed
• L seems anxious
Patterns emerged during the game with one player being a frequent use of ”Do something”
token that was in vast majority aimed at one specific player. Players reported anxiety when
the timer was running low, partially based on the experience from the previous games.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Stressed by placing the ”Do something”
Link: One of the players became visually more anxious the more they used the
”Do something” token
Variable: Starting capacity
Link: Some players struggled to see all options for the pawns resulting in changing
the moving pawn frequently, stopping the fluid movement.
Variable: Processing ratio
Link: One player was consistently slower in reactions than all other players.
Variable: Stressed by low time
Link: Two players who noticed the timer running low reported becoming stressed
when the other players did not react to the performed actions.
A.6
Game 06
Participants:
Player I, Player B, Player G, Player K
Game Result:
Lose
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
51
==PAGE:60==
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• Not sure about rules
• A lot of panicked behaviour
• Did not notice the timer
• Timer is a major pain point
• G stressed by I putting ”Do something” token
• Seeing something while others don’t causes stress
• Did not discover all tiles
The players were performing non­sensical actions under stressed caused by inaction of
other players, placement of ”Do something” token in front of them and the timer running
low. These actions resulted in pawns moving towards no goal into a narrow path and
inability to resolve pawn conflicts.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Stressed by the ”Do something” token
Link: Player G reported getting stressed upon having ”Do something” token placed
in front of them repeatedly. That influenced negatively their ability to process the
situation and resorted into performing a random available action.
Variable: Patience
Link: One players persistently exhibited very low patience compared to other play­
ers. This resulted in the over­use of the ”Do something” token pawn which put
stress onto other players, further making the situation worse.
Variable: Discover until goals
Link: After the game, players expressed disagreement over whether more cards
should have been discovered. While some pushed the pawns onto the DISCOVER
tiles, other prioritize ITEM GOAL tiles. This cause disagreement as they were not
able to understand each other’s strategies.
A.7
Game 07
Participants:
Player I, Player B, Player G, Player K
Game Result:
Win
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• Discovered all cards
• Knew the rules compared to previous game
• Quick discovery phase
• I did not use ”Do something” token as much bcs of last game’s experience
• Got lucky with card order
• Discovered tile had goal of the same colour often ­ easy to continue
Players reported much smoother run compared to the previous game. ”Do something”
token was used significantly less by I and onto G players after feedback received from
the previous game. The randomized order of the cards was deemed to end up lucky as
52
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:61==
the next drawn card included sub­goals of the same colour as the pawn discovering it.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Always place the ”Do something” token
Link: Player I has chosen not to place ”Do something” token as often as he thought
he might due to previous bad experience with it having a negative effect on another
player.
Variable: Patience
Link: The players were more patient with each other, waiting longer time before
placing the ”Do something” token.
A.8
Game 08
Participants:
Player I, Player B, Player G, Player K
Game Result:
Win
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• Smoother than previous two
• Quick and efficient
• Got used to each other’s playing style
• Some changed their playing style to match better with others
• Would use non­optimal just to move the pawn
The players were learning from the previous games and adapting their individual playing
style to better fit the team as a whole.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Patience
Link: Players were more patient and reduced significantly the use of ”Do some­
thing” token.
A.9
Game 09
Participants:
Player I, Player B, Player G, Player K
Game Result:
Lose
Session Observation: Raw Notes
• Didn’t discover every exit (1 missing) before going to goals ­ regretted
• Failed on timer early on ­ one player was blind to the timer
• 3 players saw the timer but 1 was fixated on goals
• The group as a whole assumed that everything has been discovered when I
started going for goals
The players showed high trust in other player’s assumed strategy and did not verify the
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
53
==PAGE:62==
assumed situation themselves. This lead to missing tiles. The player that was hyper­
fixated on achieving the goal of the pawns did not consider the timer and it ran out.
Player Type Impact
Variable: Stubborn
Link: One player was not willing to re­consider his strategy and prioritized his own
presumed sub­goal even when placed ”Do something” token in front of them. This
resulted in timer running out.
54
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:63==
B
Human game transcription box plots
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.1: Game 1: Transcription box plots
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.2: Game 2: Transcription box plots
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.3: Game 3: Transcription box plots
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.4: Game 4: Transcription box plots
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.5: Game 5: Transcription box plots
56
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:65==
(a) Do something token timestamps
(b) Game move timestamps
Figure B.6: Game 6: Transcription box plots
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
57
==PAGE:66==
C
Explorative questionnaire results
1­2 times
3­4 times
5+ times
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
3
3
Experience Level
Number of Responses
Figure C.1: How many times have you played Magic Maze?
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Nothing
Confused
Stressed
Curious about
what I missed
Under preasure
1
3
4
8
9
Number of Responses
Figure C.2: When someone puts the ”Do something” token in front of me, it makes me
feel:
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Place the ”Do something”
token on someone else.
Move whatever I can
move without planning.
Consider the options but
prefer my original plan.
1
2
11
Number of Responses
Figure C.3: When someone places the ”Do something” token in front of me, I:
58
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:67==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Better
Worse
Unaffected
3
4
6
Number of Responses
Figure C.4: When I have the ”Do something” token in front of me, I feel like my ability to
think clearly is:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
I check it very often.
I tend to completely
forget about it.
I only check it when
someone places the
”Do something” to­
ken in front of me.
I check it regularly
but not that often.
1
1
1
10
Number of Responses
Figure C.5: How often do you check the timer?
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
When a lot of people move a
lot of pawns at the same time.
When nobody is
doing anything.
When someone places
the ”Do something”
token in front of me.
When the time is running low.
When I place the ”Do
something” token in front
of someone else and
they don’t do anything.
3
4
5
7
7
Number of Responses
Figure C.6: What stresses you out in the game?
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
59
==PAGE:68==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Less often than
it is usually used
Just as often as
it is usually used
1
12
Number of Responses
Figure C.7: I think the ”Do something” token should be used:
Never (1)
Rarely (2) Occasionally
(3)
Frequently
(4)
Always (5)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
7
5
1
0
Frequency
Number of Responses
Figure C.8: How often do you think you miss that a pawn has been moved?
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
I always ignore it and go
back to my previous plan.
I always try to understand their
intention and try to continue
moving the green pawn even
if it does not make sense.
I try to understand their in­
tention but only move it fur­
ther if it makes sense to me.
0
1
12
Number of Responses
Figure C.9: Someone moved the green pawn. I noticed it but I do not immediately under­
stand what their intention was.
60
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:69==
1 (Very
Impatient)
2
3
4
5 (Very
Patient)
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
5
3
2
Patience Level
Number of Responses
Figure C.10: How patient are you in general?
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
3
2
3
1
1
2
1
Time (seconds)
Number of Responses
Figure C.11: How many seconds would you say you wait until you place the ”Do some­
thing” token?
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
True
False
4
9
Number of Responses
Figure C.12: Have you considered not placing the ”Do something” token just to avoid
stressing the other player.
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
61
==PAGE:70==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Tile air distance (Euclidian)
Number of cards in between
I count the ex­
act path tile by tile
Tile grid distance (Manhattan)
1
2
4
6
Number of Responses
Figure C.13: How do you estimate distance?
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I prioritize Discovery when we
have not discovered all tiles.
I prioritze Discovery when
we have not discovered
all item and exit goals.
I prioritize Timers when
the time is past half.
I prioritze Item/Exit goals im­
mediatelly when I see them.
I prioritze Timers when the
time is close to running out.
2
4
4
6
7
Number of Responses
Figure C.14: How do you prioritize goals?
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Optimal path is most
important. I don’t care
about others’ plans.
Team agreement is
most important, re­
gardless of optimality.
1
12
Number of Responses
Figure C.15: How important is optimal individual planning strategy compared to general
agreement on strategy?
62
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:71==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Understood intentions
behind every move
Felt impatient
Felt like others did not
understand my strategy
Felt stressed
Thought we were a good team
3
4
4
5
7
Number of Responses
Figure C.16: During the game I:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Just trying to do what
others think I should do
Planning all op­
tions for one pawn
Planning the first best
option for all pawns
2
6
7
Number of Responses
Figure C.17: My planning strategy is close to:
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
63
==PAGE:72==
D
Questionnaire answers: Human or AI
• Question 1: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Going for the timer make sense, but is a bit weird that other
players don’t move
– (6 ­ Probably human) It feels like someone was waiting for the timer to run out,
and only one of the pawns was moving.
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) It seemed quite fast and ’automated’ in a way
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Tough to judge, but I believe more human, as it seemed
like an interesting choice. I would have assumed the other person wanted the
player with the pawn to use the portals and get the item as there is one near
it, since they still had a decent amount of time, but perhaps the ’do something’
token made them panic and go for the choice they saw first, or perhaps they
misjudged/did not properly see the amount of time that was left and thought it
was less. It could still be AI though ­ even though they tend to be quite precise
most of the time, depending on the inputs and how much it has been trained, it
can also still make choices that seem more unusual to humans (aka me) simply
due to the much larger amount of information/processing/calculating ahead that
it does in a much shorter amount of time than humans. I am also just not that
familiar with the game yet in order to be able to say more assuredly.
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Could be either... too little info IMO
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Only one pawn is moving and it is towards the timer, even though
there’s still half a minute, although the other pawns aren’t close to a timer, so
it might have been a priority
• Question 2: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Yellow going back and forth
– (5 ­ Maybe human) The movement of yellow after the timer was reset is some­
thing I have seen a lot, and also there was no point in purple stopping where it
stopped at the end of the video.
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It looked a little slower and more random/natural
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Not sure ­ it was quite fast in decision­making after
’do something’ was placed but initially went in a curious direction...
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Quite early to use the timer... plus the purple moves seemed
inexplicable
– (6 ­ Probably human) It seems there are more agents, there’s not a concensus
with the yellow, another pawn moved during the time
• Question 3: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (6 ­ Probably human) I think it look human
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Teleporting purple into that position seems unnatural.
64
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:73==
– (5 ­ Maybe human) There were short pauses between actions
– (6 ­ Probably human) It took them quite a bit to notice where the pawns were
standing and place the discovery tiles, so I assume the person might have
forgotten for a moment that they have to discover or just took a while to place
them. Feels like AI would have done it faster.
– (2 ­ Probably AI) The usage of the purple portal seemed weird/unnecessary,
with so few tiles in play
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Did I see it correctly that once the purple pawn stepped on a
timer, the time got shorter?
• Question 4: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (6 ­ Probably human) Timing of the move seems quite human
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Moving purple too far to the left on the last step
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It seemed like it again there were small pauses between
actions suggesting that people were thinking about what to do, made it look
more natural
– (6 ­ Probably human) It took the player with the actions a moment to notice
where exactly they should move to be able to discover further and the actions
among pawns seem incomplete which feels quite human: there’s 4 pawns ­
moved some, which one do we focus one now? :D
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Can’t tell, except for the very last step of purple... that made
little sense
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It seems like the correct sort of chaos for a human game,
when the person with towards right motion was reminded, I thought it was for
the green pawn, but they first moved the orange before the green
• Question 5: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) It’s hard to say
– (5 ­ Maybe human) The order of discovering the tiles, people I played with
tended to always put down the tile that was discovered last
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) couldn’t decide but it looked kind of ’automated’
or ’mechanical’
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Not sure if I am thinking about this the right way but here all the
’do something’s’ were placed quite quickly one after another and the actions
followed after them very soon after and quite logically. It was more efficient,
but here the choices were also pretty straight­forward, so I do not want to say
too confidently that it is AI as the humans would probably also make the same
choices, but perhaps not as efficiently and routinely in the sense that there was
always a do something and an action that followed immediately...
– (5 ­ Maybe human) The orange discovery was left forgotten... since it’s the very
beginning seems slightly more likely that that’s due to human error, assuming
that the AI already had some training at this point... this feels like something
that an AI should be able to pick up on easily
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
65
==PAGE:74==
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Can’t really tell, perhaps human, they are reminding
each other a lot, but then everyone who’s reminded immediately understands
• Question 6: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (5 ­ Maybe human) The movment seems quite not coordinated so it’s probably
Humans
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Really not sure
– (6 ­ Probably human) The ’do something’ token was used quite frequently
– (6 ­ Probably human) It seems like people had different paths/ideas on how to
proceed and also the initial choice that the person who had the ’do something’
placed on them seemed borne out of panic as there was no point in moving the
purple one.
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Not sure... but the back and forth from green feels more
like a human change of mind
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) I can’t see how the timer wasn’t the priority and
they were still moving the purple. I’m now over analysing and can’t decide
whether I think it was AI or human
• Question 7: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Hard to say but orange player seems not right
– (6 ­ Probably human) Looks like someone didn’t realise what color the discov­
ery was on the right side.
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) The orange one went up and down, kind of pointlessly
– (6 ­ Probably human) It seems like the pawn kept going in a different direction
that the ’do something’ was placed for and there was not really an aligned
strategy/calculated thinking.
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Orange makes a bunch of weird moves... hard to say if it’s
due to an untrained AI or a human misunderstanding the rules
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Person having down motion was confused and stressed
and moved the wrong pawn (orange)
• Question 8: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) The movment left and right seems bot like
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) I am not sure about what is going on here
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) It seemed like the green one was moving a bit recklessly as well
– (6 ­ Probably human) Went in the wrong direction first and then someone else
went the more correct way :D
– (1 ­ Definitely AI) I don’t think a human would make this kind of mistake, the
goal was right there and no one used the red light thingy
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Only one pawn is moving and they don’t agree bot no reminder
is used
• Question 9: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
66
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:75==
– (6 ­ Probably human) Good cooperation
– (5 ­ Maybe human) This game looks like Orange got lucky at the beginning and
people were just pushing it in discovery.
– (6 ­ Probably human) do something’ was used right after a pause and was
followed by expanding the board
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Possibly AI as the ’do something’s’ and then actions that
followed were quite fast, also the use of portals in this manner.
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Not sure, could be either
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) No idea
• Question 10: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (6 ­ Probably human) Good cooperation with teleportation
– (2 ­ Probably AI) This feels like AI, why would you move the orange pawn before
the green one to the right?
– (6 ­ Probably human) A lot of ’do something’ and chaotic movements that
looked human
– (2 ­ Probably AI) It was an interesting yet somehow effective and rapid conse­
quence of actions?
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Not sure... the quick use of 2 portal moves seems more like AI
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Very coordinated? Idk
• Question 11: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It’s quite slow, maybe to slow for a bot
– (6 ­ Probably human) I think someone moved yellow to the left to direct attention
to orange.
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) I didn’t see anything change after the ’do something’ token was
used, could be just that people took more time to think and it didn’t show their
actions but it seemed too random for me to be human
– (6 ­ Probably human) Seems like the other person just did not see what they
wanted them to do so another one interacted with a pawn in the place where
they wanted them to ’do something’ :D
– (6 ­ Probably human) Feels a bit more human, forgetting about a piece
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) I’m not sure what the yellow was meant to do and it seems
uneventful other than the two movements of yellow
• Question 12: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Hmm the yellow movment dosen’t make sens. the orange
one should be the first entering the coridor
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) This is either AI or beginner players...
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It looked like a real human gameplay to me, people per­
forming actions and others ’guiding’ them with the token
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
67
==PAGE:76==
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Not sure as the sequence of actions was pretty logical to
get one of the pawns to the discovery place but also there were several do
something’s needed for the same pawn to move efficiently...
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Seems like a more AI­like mistake, yellow almost moving into
orange’s discovery square
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Idk
• Question 13: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) It efficient and good strategy, but they moving only one pawn,
would that heppen in normal game?
– (7 ­ Definitely human) Missing tile from orange discovery
– (6 ­ Probably human) Seemed human to me, a normal turn of events I could
imagine seeing in a real game
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) There was a ’do something’ before every action taken ­ this starts
to seem like a specific pattern/algorithm but I might be looking at it wrongly
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Not sure, could be either
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Everyone seems nicely coordinated and focused on one
task at a time
• Question 14: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Why green would go out of the exit?
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Feels like up and/or down were sleeping here.
– (2 ­ Probably AI) It looked very random, the green one was moving up and
down pointlessly, it also could have been a real person that was very lost and
under presure of the ’do something’ token
– (6 ­ Probably human) Seems like there was someone interacting with the spe­
cific pawn that the ’do something’ was placed for, for the other person to notice
who to interact with and what they should do.
– (1 ­ Definitely AI) Never seen a crazy back and forth like this myself, and doesn’t
feel like something that human players would do... they’d most likely stop after
one back and forth at least, unless they are just doing it for the laughs :D
– (2 ­ Probably AI) The goal with the green seemed well stated but the up motion
person was too insistent on their goal and not cooperating
• Question 15: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Why violet would stand on the orange field
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Feels like someone moved orange up at the end to signal
to the person who can go right
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It seemed like it could be human, ’do something’ were
followed by actions
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Needed several ’do something’ to notice which pawn the
person was intending the other one to interact with and move.
68
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:77==
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Most likely AI (though could be beginner players), some weird
moves and back and forths at the very beginning of the game when it’s not so
hard to see what should be done
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) The right motion person illogically moved the purple, when the
orange was right next to it and was the one that needed it
• Question 16: correct answer 7 (Definitely human)
– (6 ­ Probably human) Loooks good, with a loot of movement
– (6 ­ Probably human) The back & forth blocking in the bottom right feels human
– (6 ­ Probably human) do something’ was used and a room was opened right
after that
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Maybe human due to the sequence of actions and a couple
’do something’s’ needed to get the point across... not sure
– (4 ­ Not sure if AI or human) Not sure, could be either
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Movement of orange seems illogical and random
• Question 17: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (1 ­ Definitely AI) Violet movment seems random
– (2 ­ Probably AI) Movements seem unnatural. The players are using portals
but they have problems with basic movements
– (2 ­ Probably AI) It seemed too quick for a human game
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Seems like they were all just trying to figure out how to
place them before moving forward hence there were also no ’do something’s’
needed before starting discovery?
– (1 ­ Definitely AI) Orange constantly struggling with easily moving in to its dis­
covery square, green moving back even though it could move further for dis­
covery... none of the moves makes much sense really
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) Orange going to discovery seems like the obvious thing to do
yet apparently not generally agreed upon
• Question 18: correct answer 1 (Definitely AI)
– (2 ­ Probably AI) It’s quite Sus with green movement
– (5 ­ Maybe human) Feels like everyone except for ”right” was sleeping.
– (5 ­ Maybe human) It could have been a game with real people as a lot was
happening on the board already and nothing was being done despite the ’do
something’ token being used, it could be that there was a lot for people to
analyse and think about before making a move
– (6 ­ Probably human) There were a lot of insistent ’do something’s placed and
the movement still did not happen, seems quite human :D
– (7 ­ Definitely human) Feels like a very human scenario where someone’s being
spammed with the red light and someone probably panicked, not seeing at first
what should be done
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
69
==PAGE:78==
– (3 ­ Maybe AI) The up motion person was reminded a lot and there was only
one pawn that could go up, but they didn’t see it so maybe if it was the actual
3D pawn on a board it would be easier to see for a human
70
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
==PAGE:79==
Hierarchical Planning and Behavioural Simulation for Believable Collaborative AI
71
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
