==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and
Operational Analysis of Offshore Structures
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Translate Structural Responses into Actionable Health Insights
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational
Analysis of Offshore Structures
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Translate Structural Responses into Actionable Health
Insights
Master Thesis
December, 2025
By
Kristoffer Torngaard Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over a five­month period at the Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfill­
ment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng.).
It is assumed that the reader has foundational knowledge of statistics, machine learning,
and general computer science concepts.
The source code, trained model weights, and scripts developed for this project are sub­
mitted as an attachment (ZIP file) alongside this thesis.
Kristoffer Torngaard Pedersen ­ s205354
Signature
15­12­2025
Date
ii
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The structural integrity of aging offshore platforms is a significant concern for the energy
sector, and requires a reliable structural health monitoring strategy to ensure safety and
extend operational life. Traditional monitoring approaches are often hindered by sensor
reliability issues, labor­intensive data analysis, and high costs of wave radars. This the­
sis addresses these challenges by developing and validating machine learning method­
ologies to translate raw structural sensor data into actionable health insights by using
historical data from an operational platform located in the North Sea.
Three primary research objectives are addressed. First, an unsupervised fault detection
system was developed using a 1D Convolutional Autoencoder. The model achieved over
96% accuracy in finding sensor faults ­ such as bias, drift, and complete failure ­ from real
structural responses in accelerometers and strain gauges trained on the frequency do­
main of healthy signals. Second, an operational mode labelling system was implemented
by using the HDBSCAN clustering algorithm on power spectral density features. This
data­driven approach was able to successfully identify dominant operational states and
isolated short­lived ”shivering” events, thus demonstrating the ability to turn accelerom­
eter data into actionable labels. Third, a cost­efficient alternative to wave radars was
created to estimate sea parameters directly from accelerometers installed on the struc­
ture. A 1D CNN multi output regression model outperformed the Transformer architecture
in computational efficiency and accuracy, it also beat LSTM in efficiency while matching
its accuracy. The model was able to predict Significant Wave Height (Hs) with an MAE of
0.15m, Peak Wave Period (Tp) with an MAE of 1.1s, and reliably inferring wave direction
within established tolerance levels.
Finally, these models were put into an inference pipeline that serves as a proof­of­concept
for an automated, event­driven monitoring system. The findings confirm that artificial intel­
ligence can significantly improve the reliability and cost­effectiveness of offshore SHM by
enabling sensor fault detection, operational mode labelling, and provide wave estimates
through models trained on accelerometer data.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Hiba Nassar, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
I would like to thank Hiba Nassar for her supervision, great discussions, and expert guid­
ance throughout this thesis. Her feedback throughout the process has been amazing and
an important factor to the successful completion of this thesis.
Niels Dollerup, Chief Engineer, Rambøll
I thank Niels Dollerup for giving me the opportunity to write this thesis at Rambøll and his
advice on the engineering aspects of the project was of great value to my work.
Eimantas Poskus, Senior Engineer, Rambøll
I would also like to thanks Eimantas Poskus for his technical support, mentorship, and his
amazing help for facilitating access to the necessary data and resources required for this
thesis.
iv Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background and Industrial Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Objectives and Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Scope and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Contributions and Significance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
SHM of Offshore Structures: State­of­Practice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Sensor­Fault Diagnosis Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Operational Mode Labelling and Influence on SHM . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Wave Inference from Structural Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theoretical Framework
11
3.1
Sensor Fault Diagnostics and Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Fourier Transformation and Power Spectral Density
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Machine Learning Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Operational Mode Labelling (OML) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Wave Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methodology
15
4.1
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Model Implementation for Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Data & Experimental Setup
17
5.1
Data Gathering & Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
System Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Implementation
27
6.1
Sensor Fault Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.2
Operational Mode Labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.3
Wave Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.4
Inference Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7
Results
45
7.1
Sensor Fault Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Operational Mode Labelling (OML) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.3
Wave Estimation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.4
Inference Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Discussion
63
8.1
Model Drift, Structural and Environmental Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.2
Sensor Fault Reconstruction Error Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.3
Noise: Friend or Foe? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.4
The Meaning of ”Noise” in Operational Mode Labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8.5
Distance Issue in Wave Estimation for Wave Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
8.6
Comparison of Findings with Existing Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
8.7
Evaluation of AI Research Questions for SHM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
9
Conclusion
67
10 Future Work
69
Bibliography
70
A Example of Broken Sensor
77
B Use of Logarithmic Scaling in Welch PSD Diagrams
78
C Rust on Displacement Transducer
79
D Significant Wave Height (Hs) Formulation
80
E
Mean Replacement Constant Accelerometer Test
81
F
Correlation Matrix for Accelerometer of February ­ April 2020 Data
82
G Displacement Transducer Sensor Correlation
83
H LSTM Training Run
84
I
LSTM Evaluation Diagrams
85
J
Inference Pipeline Output
86
vi Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:9==
Declaration on the Use of AI Tools
In preparing this thesis, I used AI­assisted tools (ChatGPT & Gemini) to support, but not
replace my own work. The use of AI tools use was limited to the following purposes:
1. Language clarity: To make sentences more digestible (grammar, wording, and flow
suggestions) where needed. I reviewed all suggestions as inspiration. All content
was written by me.
2. Research & information lookup: To brainstorm, summarize material, and suggest
search terms.
3. Design consultation: To find alternatives and trade­offs for data processing, model
architectures, and visualization choices. Final design decisions, implementations,
and analyses are my own.
The tools were not used to generate or change any data, results, or conclusions. It was
not used to write sections autonomously or to circumvent academic integrity. All outputs
from AI tools were critically evaluated, and I accept full responsibility for the content of
this thesis.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Industrial Motivation
Offshore structures, crucial for oil and gas extraction, renewable energy solutions, and
a large number of different maritime operations, have significantly increased over recent
years[1]. Many of these offshore structures are aging, and therefore have an increased
need for effective monitoring and maintenance strategies. Structural Health Monitoring
(SHM) through vibration analysis provides a reliable approach of evaluating the condition
of offshore structures[2]. Recent advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI) have demon­
strated considerable promise, particularly in analyzing large volumes of data. AI­based
SHM methods offer new opportunities that ensures safety, reliability, and cost efficiency
in offshore operations, motivating a growing interest in the industry in deploying AI­driven
tools.
1.2
Problem Definition
While SHM systems are vital for ensuring the safety and operational integrity of aging off­
shore structures, their implementation in terms of practicality faces some challenges that
can limit their effectiveness when deployed. The biggest issue is the reliability of the sen­
sors themselves. The harsh and unpredictable environment can make the sensors mal­
function. This includes bias, drift, and complete failure[3]. Current SHM approaches often
struggle to automatically and accurately distinguish between real structural anomalies and
broken sensor readings. This can result in missed damage or costly false alarms[4]. This
creates a critical need for an intelligent fault detection system that allows to reliably vali­
date sensor data.
Another challenge is in interpreting the large amount of vibration data that is generated by
SHM systems. The structural response of an offshore platform is heavily influenced by its
constantly changing operational and especially environmental conditions[5]. Operational
activities such as crane operation, pumping, generator noise, structural events, or varying
sea states produce vibration signatures that can be difficult to tell apart from ordinary
operation. Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) is used to identify a structure’s dynamic
properties and often requires significant user input, making it labor­intensive and difficult to
scale for continuous monitoring[6]. The development of automated identification methods
to recognize the operational modes is a key step toward more reliable SHM.
Finally, a complete understanding of the environmental load, particularly from waves, is
crucial for anticipating and assessing structural integrity. Unfortunately, a direct measure­
ment of wave characteristics is often a costly affair as the specialized equipment, like wave
radars and buoy systems, are very expensive and can amass significant maintenance
costs. Some research has explored estimating wave parameters from the structural re­
sponse of a vessel, these methods are not yet widely adapted for fixed offshore platforms
and often rely on complex physical models[7]. There is a research gap in developing a
cost effective and data driven approach that can infer key wave characteristics (such as
height, period, and direction) solely based on vibration data already being collected for
SHM purposes. A capability like this would not only reduce monitoring costs in terms of
equipment but also provide more insights into wave­structure interactions.
This thesis addresses these challenges by using artificial intelligence to translate raw
2
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:11==
structural response data into actionable insights. Specifically, there is a focus on devel­
oping AI that allows:
• An intelligent sensor fault detection system to ensure data reliability.
• An automated operational mode labeling methodology to find out of norm structural
responses.
• A model for estimating wave characteristics directly from the vibrations of the struc­
ture.
By tackling these problems, this research aims to improve the accuracy, autonomy, and
cost effectiveness of the SHM systems for this offshore structure, thus leading to a safer
and more efficient operation of the offshore structure.
1.3
Research Objectives and Questions
This thesis develops and implements AI­powered algorithms to improve the reliability and
efficiency of vibration­based SHM systems in offshore installations. Three core objectives
guide this research:
1. Faulty Sensor Detection:
Develop an AI algorithm capable of accurately detecting faulty sensor data,
distinguishing both long­term sensor failures and short­term abnormalities due
to external events.
Research Question 1: How can an AI­based system reliably distinguish be­
tween sensor data failures and genuine structural anomalies under diverse
operating conditions?
2. Operational Mode Labelling:
Implement an AI approach to label operational modes dynamically based on
vibration sensor data, effectively enabling being able to differentiate between
different types of operation.
Research Question 2: How can AI algorithms utilize vibration­based SHM sen­
sor data to show varying operational modes for offshore installations?
3. Wave Characteristic Detection:
Develop a cost­effective AI­based approach to accurately estimate essential
wave characteristics (significant wave height, peak wave period, and wave di­
rection) without relying exclusively on expensive radar equipment.
Research Question 3: Can AI reliably estimate wave characteristics from ac­
celeration data, reducing the dependence on high­cost radar systems?
1.4
Scope and Limitations
This section defines the boundaries of this research and will outline what is included within
the scope of this thesis and also acknowledge the limitations that may affect the interpre­
tation of the findings.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
3
==PAGE:12==
1.4.1
Scope
This thesis is focused on the development and validation of machine learning method­
ologies to improve the Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) of a specific offshore platform
located in the North Sea. The scope is defined by three primary research objectives:
1. Sensor Fault Detection: To create and evaluate a model that is capable of identi­
fying faulty sensor readings and distinguishing anomalous data from genuine struc­
tural responses.
2. Operational Mode Labelling: To implement a machine learning approach that can
discover distinct operational states of the platform by analyzing patterns within its
vibration data.
3. Wave Characteristic Estimation: To create a model that can infer key wave char­
acteristics using only structural response data, aiming to provide a cost­effective
alternative to dedicated wave radar.
The entire analysis is made on a historical dataset provided by Rambøll. All methodolo­
gies are developed and tested as a proof­of­concept within an offline analysis framework,
demonstrating the feasibility of applying AI­driven techniques to raw SHM data.
1.4.2
Limitations
Even though this thesis presents a strong approach, it is still subject to several limitations
that are important to acknowledge:
• Generalizability of the Models: The machine learning models are trained and val­
idated on data from a single offshore structure, and due to the unique dynamic
environment, structural design, and sensor configuration of this specific offshore
structure, the models developed here are not directly transferable to other offshore
structures without the need for retraining and revalidation.
• Validation of Fault Detection: The sensor fault detection models are evaluated
against synthetically generated faults. While this approach attempts to imitate com­
mon sensor fault types, it is not the same as a test against a full spectrum of real
sensor malfunctions.
• Unsupervised Labelling: The operational modes are identified using a unsuper­
vised clustering algorithm. This means that the resulting labels are data­driven and
lack a real ground­truth verification. The interpretation of these clusters are done in
collaboration with domain experts from Rambøll as a post­hoc analysis to identify
the significance of the clusters.
• Domain Expertise: This thesis uses a computer science approach to handle prob­
lems rooted in Structural and Marine Engineering, showing how AI methods can
improve traditional approaches in these domains. While the research aligns with
the goals of Rambøll, the thesis remains focused on computer science methods
rather than deep domain­specific engineering analysis. As a result of this it does not
include the deep domain­specific expertise of Structural and Marine Engineering.
Therefore, some alternative approaches might exist that require advanced struc­
tural and marine engineering knowledge that might lead to better solutions but are
beyond the scope of this thesis.
• Wave Direction Ground­Truth: The ground­truth data used for the wave direction
aspect of the wave estimation model is retrieved from a buoy 15 km away. This
4
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:13==
causes a physical constraint in the structural loading applied to the structure and
the actual wave direction.
1.5
Contributions and Significance
Machine learning techniques such as the CNN and Autoencoders are well known in the
realm of computer science, but their use to the domain of offshore SHM presents chal­
lenges regarding data quality, environmental variability, and interpretation. This thesis
contributes to the field in the following ways:
1. Development of Wave Estimation Model using Accelerometers: This research
shows the feasibility of estimating important sea­state parameters (Significant Wave
Height, Peak Period, and Wave Direction) using the accelerometers installed on the
offshore structure using a 1D CNN with fully connected layers. This offers a cost
effective alternative to the expensive wave radar systems, while also presenting a
comparative analysis against well­known LSTM and Transformer architectures.
2. Validation on Real Life Industrial Data: Unlike studies that are relying on sim­
ulated environments, this thesis validates unsupervised fault detection (CNN Au­
toencoder) and operational mode labelling (HDBSCAN) on raw, noise­contaminated
data from an active and working North Sea platform. This shows the reliability of
these methods under real­world operating conditions.
1.6
Thesis Structure
This thesis has been organized into 10 chapters. The reader is guided through from the
initial introduction to the final conclusions and future work directions. The structure of the
thesis has been created in such a way to present the research and work in logical and
progressive manner.
• Chapter 1: Introduction creates the underlying context for this work by explaining
the industrial motivation for SHM in offshore structures. The chapter defines the
core problems of sensor reliability, operational modes, and sea state estimation.
The specific research objectives, questions, scope, and limitations.
• Chapter 2: Literature Review gives an overview of the current approaches to the
problems relevant to this thesis. It examines the existing practices in SHM for off­
shore structures, and looks into various techniques and research for sensor fault
detection, operational mode labelling, and wave estimation models.
• Chapter 3: Theoretical Framework provides information on the fundamental con­
cepts for the methodologies in this work. This includes the theory of sensor fault di­
agnostics, the principles of operational mode labeling through clustering algorithms,
the underlying theories used to analyze or perform feature engineering on the data,
and how wave parameters are retrieved.
• Chapter 4: Methodology explains the research and general approaches taken to
address the research objectives. A description of the initial data processing and
feature engineering applied to the raw sensor data and introduces the modeling
strategies used and implemented for each research goal.
• Chapter 5: Data & Experimental Setup describes the dataset from a North Sea
offshore platform, and details the various sensor types installed and their use. It
presents the results of an exploratory data analysis, outlines the hardware and soft­
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
5
==PAGE:14==
ware configuration used for model development, and discusses the ethical consid­
erations related to the data.
• Chapter 6: Implementation provides an explanation of the development of the
machine learning models. A specification of the architecture and training process
for the sensor fault detection model, the application of the HDBSCAN algorithm for
operational mode labeling, and the design of the convolutional neural network for
wave characteristic estimation.
• Chapter 7: Results presents the empirical findings from the implemented models.
This chapter showcases the performance of the sensor fault detection system, the
distinct operational modes identified by the clustering algorithm, and the accuracy
of the wave estimation model, using quantitative metrics and visualizations.
• Chapter 8: Discussion has an interpretation of the results. It analyzes the impli­
cations of the findings, such as the selection of an appropriate reconstruction error
threshold for fault detection and the potential for model drift.
• Chapter 9: Conclusion summarizes the contributions of the thesis. It revisits the
research questions and provides an overview of the findings, supporting the value
of using artificial intelligence to utilize structural responses into actionable health
insights for SHM in offshore structures.
• Chapter 10: Future Work outlines directions for further research. It suggests some
improvements for wave estimation through onsite ground­truth data retrieval, pro­
poses continuous learning framework approach to handle model drift, and recom­
mends refining feature extraction techniques for improving operational mode la­
belling.
6
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
SHM of Offshore Structures: State­of­Practice
Offshore platforms have seen growing interest in SHM over the past decade[8]. The
structural integrity of rigs is traditionally managed via periodic inspections ­ usually per­
formed by a diver or through remote operated vehicle inspections of underwater members
­ and conservative design safety factors[9]. Monitoring often involves a set of sensors and
simple threshold­based alarms. Challenges specific to offshore SHM are primarily their
remote location, limited access to maintenance, power and communication constraints
for sensors, and the harsh environment that sensors operate in with the possible conse­
quences of sensor drift or damage[10]. These issues are generally heightened on aging
rigs. Many platforms have exceeded their original design life, and are being evaluated
for life extension[9, 11]. As a result, there is a growing need for more robust, data­driven
monitoring solutions to ensure the safety and reliability of these extended­life platforms.
Several industry guidelines recommends advanced monitoring. For example, the Health
and Safety Executive (HSE) in the UK requires risk assessment for aging offshore assets
and encourages continuous monitoring of safety­critical elements[12]. However, even
with clear recommendations from government institutions implementing SHM in offshore
structures is not a trivial task. Many of the offshore SHM deployments rely heavily on
numerical simulations provided by commercial software. These solutions are generally
expensive and time­consuming to utilize. Moreover, translating ”advanced monitoring”
into a deployable SHM program at sea is made difficult by practical and methodologi­
cal constraints. Offshore assets operate under highly stochastic conditions, with coupled
loads (wind­wave­soil interaction), corrosive environments, scouring, and occasional ac­
cidental events, all of which contributes in complicating the functionality of sensors and
interpretation of sensor results. The current numerical models provided by commercial
software struggle with the ”model to reality” gap that is created by modeling errors, incor­
rect assumptions, model simplifications or created by the drift of structural properties over
time, thus eroding the confidence present in automated alerts[11].
Despite these challenges, SHM in offshore structures has shown progress in areas such
as vibration­based monitoring and fatigue crack detection. Developments in digital twins
and probabilistic modeling frameworks have also enabled better integration with mon­
itoring data in numerical simulation. However, the listed approaches are still close to
widespread adoption. A major barrier still remains as there is an apparent lack of stan­
dardized methodologies and approached for sensor deployment, data handling, and long­
term interpretation of the outputs from the sensors in an offshore context[11, 8].
To overcome these challenges, research has increasingly shifted towards utilizing ma­
chine learning and artificial intelligence to improve on SHM capabilities[10]. Machine
learning approaches are particularly interesting for offshore implementations as they can
learn directly from operational data, adapt to evolving structural conditions, and gener­
ally reduce the dependency on models that tend to drift over time. While some studies
have been reported in simulated environments with proof­of­concepts, field validation on
operating offshore platforms with these solutions are still limited, and with difficulty demon­
strating reliability of deep learning models deployed in industrial settings[8]. This creates
a research opportunity to demonstrate how a SHM system empowered with artificial in­
telligence can be deployed on existing offshore rigs to continuously track their health.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Sensor­Fault Diagnosis Techniques
Offshore environments are noisy, stochastic, and unpredictable ­ making it hard to extract
clean signals. In the past 25 years, data driven fault detection on sensors has received
a significant interest in research as a use­case of modeling redundancy in sensor net­
works[11]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a multivariate statistical technique that
works by transforming the original variables into a new set of uncorrelated variables called
principal components. These components are ordered in a way that the first captures the
most variance in the data, the second captures the next most, and so on. Researchers
often use PCA in data analysis, machine learning, and pattern recognition to simplify data,
remove noise, or visualize high­dimensional datasets[13].
Early applications, such as those by Friswell and Inman [14], combined PCA with modal
filtering to validate sensor data. Building on this foundations, Kerschen et al.[15] refined
the methodology by comparing principal subspaces between healthy reference data and
active monitoring data. In another work, by Kullaa[4] it was proposed using a minimum
mean square error (MMSE) estimation technique to identify the faulty sensors by exploit­
ing redundancy in vibration data.
Overall, research has progressed from using PCA validation towards more reliable and
adaptive methods that are capable of handling non­linear properties, and uncertainties in
sensor fault detection. The newest addition to sensor fault detection builds on the signif­
icant advancements in AI and ML in recent years, offering powerful tools for addressing
complex and uncertain conditions in structural health monitoring [11]. For instance, Fritz
et al. [3] proposed an approach that takes signal processing with deep learning to ad­
dress not only fault detection, but also isolation, accommodation, and identification. In
their methodology, they use an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) as a regression algorithm.
It detects faults by comparing data predicted by the ANN against the actual sensor data.
If the deviation is too high, a fault is detected. A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
is acting as a classification algorithm. Once the ANN detects a fault, the signal is trans­
formed using a wavelet transform and fed into the CNN, which detects the specific type
of fault.
2.3
Operational Mode Labelling and Influence on SHM
Offshore installations are exposed to a wide range of operational modes that can signif­
icantly effect measured vibrations. An operational mode is a distinct condition or phase
of operation that affects how loads (e.g. vibrations) interact with the offshore structure.
Operational Mode Labelling (OML) is the act of labelling based on insights gathered from
an Operational Modal Analysis (OMA). In a situation where external and uncontrollable
forces are met, as seen on an offshore platform, OMA is used to understand the dynamics
of the structure[16]. The different modes of interest in OMA could include normal produc­
tion, drilling operations, crane lifting, and periods of standby. In SHM research, a large
challenge is distinguishing between changes in structural due to different operational and
environmental conditions. The vibrational signature of a platform, for instance, will differ
when a crane is lifting heavy equipment compared to when it is idle. This variability can
mask subtle changes in data. Being able to understand this data with rapid assessment
of what is going on is important. Therefore, the ability to automatically identify and label
different operational modes is critical for a SHM system.
The process of automating OMA, often referred to as Automated Operational Modal Anal­
ysis (AOMA), has seen an increased interest, especially around machine learning[6]. A
way to do AOMA is the interpretation of stabilization diagrams, which are used to find
8
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:17==
physical modes. Unfortunately, using stabilization diagrams is often time­consuming and
a subjective process that requires expert domain knowledge. To deal with this clustering
algorithms have been in increasingly used to cluster similar modal features and identify
operational modes[17].
Among the large amount of the different clustering algorithms that exists, density­based
methods have shown a lot of promise like Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applica­
tions with Noise (DBSCAN) or Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applica­
tions with Noise (HDBSCAN). HDBSCAN is an advanced clustering algorithm that gives
multiple advantages for OML. Especially in the context of offshore SHM. Unlike the more
traditional clustering algorithms, like K­Means, HDBSCAN does not require the number
of clusters to be predefined and can find clusters of different shapes and densities[18,
19]. This is highly useful for complex and unpredictable data from offshore platforms.
Additionally, HDBSCAN is able to handle noise and identify outliers, which is important
for sensor data and isolating distinct operational states. The use of HDBSCAN in OML
is based around clustering the features extracted from the vibration data. These features
could be statistical measures or different frequency domain characteristics Each cluster
identified by HDBSCAN would be a operational mode or part of an operational mode. For
example, the algorithm should ideally find differences between the vibrational patterns.
2.4
Wave Inference from Structural Response
A deep understanding of the environmental conditions like wave characteristics is impor­
tant for SHM of offshore structures. The use of instruments like wave buoys and radars
provide accurate data, but these systems are expensive to install and maintain. This has
motivated research into some indirect methods, where wave characteristics are inferred
from the structure’s response by leveraging sensor data.
With the development of more advanced computational power and data­driven approach
there has been a significant traction in using machine learning to solve this issue. A
trend in recent research is the application of using different machine learning models to
establish a relationship between structural responses and wave characteristics. One such
piece of research been used to predict nearshore waves and hydrodynamics. Their work
showed that a CNN could accurately predict wave propagation, breaking, and the bore
propagation with greater computational efficiency than the original hydrodynamic SWASH
model[20].
Recent research has used using deep learning techniques that map time­series motion
data directly to sea state parameters. For example, Selimović et al.[21] investigated do­
ing estimation of significant wave height, zero­crossing period, and relative wave direction
using only ship motion responses (pitch, heave, and roll). While their study validated the
effectiveness of CNNs and Multivariate Long Short­Term Memory (MLSTM) networks,
their primary contribution was the development of a novel Attention­based Neural Net­
work (AT­NN). This was done by using self­attention mechanisms that are able to capture
long range dependencies within the signal data, the AT­NN model outperformed tradi­
tional, CNN and LSTM architectures, reducing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) by up to
83% compared to original state of the art methods. Also to address the reliability issues
common in data driven approaches, they introduced a method for interpreting uncertainty
in the network’s outputs based on Monte Carlo dropout, thereby improving the model’s
trustworthiness for practical navigation and monitoring applications.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
9
==PAGE:18==
10 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:19==
3
Theoretical Framework
This chapter details the fundamental computational and mathematical concepts that the
methodologies developed uses in this thesis. First a definition of the sensor faults that can
be found in SHM is detailed. Next, details on signal process techniques used to transform
raw signal data into the frequency domain works. Finally, an overview of the specific
neural network architectures, and clustering algorithms used is described, alongside the
mathematical definitions of the wave parameters needed for the Wave Estimation model.
3.1
Sensor Fault Diagnostics and Approaches
Sensor fault is a serious threat to the reliability of SHM systems. Sensor faults can cause
data corruption or data loss. Fault diagnosis of SHM systems generally consists of four
stages. According to Fritz et al.[3], the stages of fault diagnosis are:
1. Fault detection: Recognizing the adverse operation of the system,
2. Fault isolation: Specifying the exact location of the fault,
3. Fault identification: Determining the type (or nature) of the fault,
4. Fault accommodation: Compensating for the effects of the fault.
This thesis addresses the detection stage of sensor fault diagnosis, which is defined as
detecting and recognizing the adverse operation of a system.
Multiple types of sensor faults can happen. Any of these faults compromises the reliability
of the data and, therefore, also the ability to assess the condition around the structure.
There are seven basic types of faults that are commonly seen with SHM system[3], with
two of them being a type of complete failure, see Table 3.1.
3.2
Fourier Transformation and Power Spectral Density
This thesis utilizes data transformed from time domain to frequency domain. Vibration
data from offshore structure sensors is in its nature time­series data. However, struc­
tural data is often best analyzed in the frequency domain to identify natural frequencies,
resonances and harmonics. The mathematical tool for this conversion is the Discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT), which transform a finite sequence at a constant sampling rate
into a sequence of complex numbers representing the amplitude and phase of the signal’s
frequency components[22].
In practice the Fourier transform is computed by using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
version. The FFT (O(N log N)) has an advantage of memory and speed over the DFT
(O(N2)[22, 23]. Nonetheless, a raw FFT on stochastic signals, like the vibrations induced
by wind and ocean waves, results in a spectrum with noise (see the FFT vs Welch PSD in
Appendix A). To handle this Welch’s method is used to calculate the Power Spectral Den­
sity (PSD). Welch’s method splits the time­series into overlapping segments and applies
a windowing function (in this case we use Hann) to each segment to minimize the spectral
leakage at the edge of the segments. The periodograms from these windowed segments
are then averaged. This averaging process significantly reduces the noise of the spectral
estimate, returning a lot smoother and more reliable representation of the distribution of
signal energy across all the frequencies[24].
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 3.1: Different Types of Sensor Faults [3] seen in SHM
Fault
Common Types
Example Causes
Bias
Deviation between sensor output
and the actual measurement.
Degradation, corrosion, incorrect
calibration, or physical changes
due to temperature variations.
Drift
Gradual deviation between sen­
sor output and true response over
time.
Aging of the sensor, material com­
position changes, or strain on re­
sistive wires.
Gain
Sensor data scaled by a constant
factor (higher/lower than actual).
Debonding between sensor and
structure, unstable voltage supply,
electrical or mechanical fatigue.
Precision
Degrada­
tion
Additional noise on the signal, re­
ducing measurement precision.
Magnetic fields,
electrical noise
from power supply.
Complete
Failure
Sensor outputs either a constant
value (flatline) or pure noise with no
correlation to the real response.
Broken wires or damage to sensor.
Outliers
Isolated spikes or dropouts ­ signal
returns to normal afterwards.
Environmental
variations,
loose
electrical contacts.
3.3
Machine Learning Architectures
The analysis of time­series data from offshore sensors requires models that are capable
of capturing temporal aspects and complex non­linear patterns. This thesis uses deep
learning architectures that are specifically great for sequential sensor data. This section
details mechanics of the 1D Convolutional Neural Networks (1D CNN) and the Autoen­
coder architecture used for unsupervised fault detection.
3.3.1
1D Convolutional Neural Networks (1D CNN)
The CNN[25] is normally widely associated with 2D image processing, but 1D CNNs are
specialized for sequential data such as time­series sensor readings. In a 1D CNN, the
kernel (or filter) slides along the data. This allows the neural network to learn the local
patterns, such as short­lived vibration spikes, or specific wave cycles, wherever they hap­
pen in the time window. Kernels vary in size and can capture varying aspects of the data
based on the size. Stacking 1D CNN layers on top of each other is a common practice to
capture different details of the data[26].
3.3.2
Autoencoders for Anomaly Detection
An autoencoder is a specific type of neural network architecture that is used for unsu­
pervised learning through a bottleneck. It consists of two parts. First, the encoder that
compresses the input into a latent space representation, which is a representation of the
data in a reduced dimension. It also consists of a decoder that has the objective of re­
constructing the input data from the encoded representation. This means that it tries to
create a piece of output data that is as close as it can get to the original input[27].
12 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:21==
In the context of fault detection, the autoencoder is trained on healthy sensor data. The
assumption is that the model will learn to compress and reconstruct healthy structural
dynamics. When presented with anomalous or otherwise broken data (e.g. a spiking
sensor), the model will fail to reconstruct it accurately. This will result in a high recon­
struction error, which will serve as an anomaly score.
3.4
Operational Mode Labelling (OML)
The primary challenge of OML is differentiating between the events of interest and the
noise inducing factors.
The offshore structure is constantly subject to influences like
changing environmental conditions and varying operational loads. The problematic part
of performing OML on an offshore structure is how the sensor’s data can change over
time due to fatigue or a changing environment (for example due to global warming)[2,
28]. This means that one operational mode at one point can have a frequency signature
that looks very different another time, and thus cause it the be clustered differently.
3.4.1
Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with
Noise (HDBSCAN)
Clustering algorithms like K­means assumes spherical cluster shapes and requires a pre­
defined number of k clusters. On the other hand, density­based algorithms like DBSCAN
identify clusters as areas of high amount of density relative to areas of low density of
arbitrary shapes[29].
HDSBCAN builds on top of the traditional DBSCAN algorithm, and solves the issue of
having to select a density threshold (ϵ) by constructing a hierarchy of all the possible clus­
ters. First it calculates the distance to the k­th nearest neighbor to estimate the density. It
then builds a minimum spanning tree based on the ”mutual reachability distance”, which
pushes sparse points further away. Next, it condenses the tree to find stable clusters that
stay over varying density thresholds (ϵ). Lastly it assigns a probability of membership for
each point to a cluster. Points that do not fit any of the stable clusters are labeled as
noise[30, 31].
3.5
Wave Parameters
Accurately estimating the sea sate using structural response data requires the wave pa­
rameters that serve as the target variables for the machine learning models to be defined.
In offshore engineering, the sea state is typically characterized by statistical metrics de­
rived from surface elevation measurements. This thesis focuses on three parameters:
Significant Wave Height (Hs), Peak Wave Period (Tp), and Wave Direction.
3.5.1
Significant Wave Height (Hs)
Hs is a statistical measure corresponding to the mean height of the highest one­third of
waves in a given time period[32]. This value is used typically in oceanography and coastal
engineering as it provides a representative value for the state of the sea that aligns well
with what can be observed visually. In this thesis, Hs is calculated from the time­domain
data using the zero upcrossing method[33]. This is done by finding the individual waves
by detecting the points where the sea surface elevation crosses the mean sea level in an
upward direction. The height of each wave is found by taking the difference between the
wave crest and preceding trough. After identifying all the indivdual wave heights, they are
sorted in a descending order, and the mean of the top third is then the Hs. This can be
expressed as[34]:
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
13
==PAGE:22==
Hs =
1
N/3
N/3
∑
j=1
Hj
where N is the number of found waves and Hj are the individual wave heights sorted in
a descending order. See Appendix D for a mathematical formulation. This approach has
been implemented in Python for the development of the wave estimation model.
3.5.2
Peak Wave Period (Tp)
The peak wave period, Tp, represents the period associated with the most energetic
waves in the spectrum[32], and is essentially the time interval between successive wave
crests of the waves that carry the greatest amount of energy in a given sea state. It is
determined using the frequency domain by computing the power spectral density (PSD)
of the sea surface elevation data using Welch’s method. This method improves the accu­
racy by dividing the data into overlapping parts, applying a window to each part to reduce
noise and then average the results. This process produces the PSD, which shows how the
waves energies are distributed across the different frequencies. The frequency at which
the PSD is highest represents the most energetic waves, and the peak wave period is
found by taking one divided by that frequency:
Tp = 1
fp
where fp is the peak frequency corresponding to the maximum value of the PSD.
14 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:23==
4
Methodology
This chapter details the approach taken to achieve the research objectives outlined in
Section 1.3. This chapter outlines the conceptual framework and research design used
to address the research objectives. The proposed workflow is detailed, starting from the
strategy for data acquisition and pre­processing, to the architectural design of the machine
learning models.
This chapter focuses on on the theoretical approach and design choices. The specific
technical approach, software configurations, and coding details are presented in Chapter
6, and the evaluation and analysis of the results are presented in Chapter 7.
Throughout the entire thesis an agile approach has been used to iteratively develop, test,
and refine each research problem. This approach allowed for flexibility in experimenting
with different pre­processing techniques, model architectures, and evaluation metrics.
Regular feedback loops with supervisors and continuous validation ensured that the ap­
proach remained aligned with the research objectives.
4.1
Data Processing
The pipeline begins with ingesting raw sensor data from the proprietary .acq files, which
are parsed into the Apache Parquet format. To combat computational overhead and focus
on the relevant frequency range for structural dynamics the 128 Hz signals are low­pass
filtered with an IIR filter and downsampled to 32 Hz or 4 Hz depending on the use case.
This thesis has used different datasets and data sources:
Table 4.1: Overview of Datasets
Dataset
Data Source
Time Period
Key Data Types
2024 SHM Dataset
Rambøll GCP
Feb 1, 2024 ­ Apr 19, 2024
ACC, STR, LVDT
2020 SHM (Short)
Rambøll GCP
Feb 1, 2020 ­ Apr 19, 2020
ACC, STR, LVDT
2020 SHM (Long)
Rambøll GCP
Jan 1, 2020 ­ Sep 30, 2020
ACC,
STR,
LVDT,
WAV
2020 Buoy
Rambøll InfluxDB
Jan 1, 2020 ­ Sep 30, 2020
Hs, Tp, Wave Direc­
tion
2024 SHM Dataset has been used for the sensor fault detection development of ACC and
STR. 2020 SHM (Short) was used for sensor fault detection of the LVDT and operational
mode labelling. 2020 SHM (Long) and 2020 Buoy was used for the development of the
wave estimation model.
4.2
Model Implementation for Research Objectives
The sensor fault detection and wave estimation models were implemented using the Py­
Torch framework to address the three primary research goals. The operational mode
labelling has been developed using the HDBSCAN library.
For sensor fault detection, the problem was framed as an unsupervised anomaly detection
task. A 1D Convolutional Autoencoder (CNN AE) was trained exclusively on healthy data.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
15
==PAGE:24==
Its ability to learn a compressed representation of normal signals allows it to flag faults,
which manifest as inputs that the model cannot reconstruct accurately, resulting in a high
reconstruction error[27].
For operational mode labelling, an unsupervised learning approach was selected due to
the absence of ground­truth labels or data (such as operational logs) for the platform’s
different operational states. The Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Ap­
plications with Noise (HDBSCAN) algorithm was chosen for this unsupervised learning
task. HDBSCAN is particularly great for this application as it does not require the num­
ber of k clusters to be specified beforehand, can identify clusters of any arbitrary shape,
and is good at handling noise, which is very important in sensor data from offshore en­
vironments[30]. The methodology involves clustering features derived from the Power
Spectral Density (PSD) of accelerometer signals, allowing the algorithm to cluster distinct
operational patterns based on their unique vibrational signatures.
For estimating wave characteristics, the problem has been made as a multi­output re­
gression task. A supervised learning model was developed to predict the significant wave
height Hs, peak wave period Tp and wave direction from accelerometer data. A 1D CNN
has been selected as model architecture, due to its ability to learn hierarchical features
and temporal dependencies from sequential data, making it very powerful for analyzing
time­series signals without extensive feature engineering[26]. To handle the circular de­
pendency of the wave direction, the angle was transformed into its sine and cosine com­
ponents, allowing the model to treat it as a continuous output.
16 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:25==
5
Data & Experimental Setup
5.1
Data Gathering & Processing
The sensors and the wave radar data have been provided by Rambøll and originates from
an offshore structure located in the North Sea that has been collecting measurements for
over 6 years. The sensor data comes from accelerometers, strain gauges, and displace­
ment transducers, recorded at a sample rate of 128 Hz. The wave radar data is provided
at 10 Hz. All the data is uploaded to Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Cloud Storage directly
from the offshore structure, where the data is then downloaded locally for use in this the­
sis. The data is provided as individual .acq RigSys format files one for wave radar and for
each type of sensor. Each .acq RigSys file contains 1 hour of collected measurements.
Each type of sensor has a number of channels, see table table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Summary of instruments, channel counts, and naming conventions used in the
monitoring system.
Instrument
Sensors
Channels
Channel Naming Pattern / Description
Accelerometers
(ACC)
6
18
Each sensor records three orthogonal directions:
_N, _E, _V (e.g., ACC_1_N, ACC_2_E, ACC_3_V). De­
rived channels include velocity (VEL_) and dis­
placement (DIS_) for each direction.
Strain gauges
(STR)
6
24
Each sensor includes multiple raw and pro­
cessed channels: RAW_STR_1_A-D, STR_1_A-D,
and derived quantities such as AXIAL_LOAD_1,
BENDING_MOMENT_1, etc.
Displacement
transducers
(LVDT)
2
2
Direct displacement measurements:
DIS_1_1,
DIS_1_2.
Wave
radar
(WAV)
1
1
Single­channel surface elevation record: WAVE.
Total
15
45
The accelerometers directly measure linear acceleration (ACC) along one or more axes.
Velocity (VEL) is obtained by integrating the acceleration signal with respect to time, and
displacement (DIS) by double integrating (or equivalently, by integrating velocity). Since
VEL and DIS are mathematically derived from ACC, they are strongly correlated with the
acceleration data. However, the integration process also introduces errors such as drift,
noise amplification, and baseline offsets, which must be corrected (e.g., through filtering or
detrending) to obtain reliable velocity and displacement estimates. The accelerometers,
see Figure 5.1, are located various places with two being on the east platform, two on the
south platform, and two on the bridge. The sensors are distributed across the structure
to capture acceleration data from the entire offshore structure.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.1: Left: Pictures of accelerometers installed on East Platform, Right: bridge
structure. Pictures originates from internal report[35].
Similarly, the strain gauges (STR) provide raw signals (RAW_STR) that are calibrated
into strain values (STR). From these calibrated measurements, structural responses such
as axial load (AXIAL_LOAD) and bending moment (BENDING_MOMENT) are computed
using standard mechanics relationships. Like with accelerometer data, these quantities
are directly derived from the raw measurements and therefore closely correlated with the
underlying strain signals. At the same time, issues such as noise, thermal drift, calibration
errors, or gauge misalignment can distort the derived loads and moments, sometimes
producing drift or false variations. The position of the strain gauges, see Figure 5.2, are
concentrated around the east side of the bridge, thus being very localized.
Figure 5.2: Installation of strain gauge on bridge member before being rapped with neo­
prene. Picture originates from internal report[35].
Finally, the displacement sensors (LVDT) provide the displacement (DIS) of the structure.
This is measured by a steel rod connected to a sensor that can read the rod position, see
Figure 5.3. The rod is connected to the bridge, while being placed on the bridge landing on
18 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:27==
the East Platform[35]. The sensor measures relative movement between the bridge and
bridge landing with 0.05 mm precision. The LVDT is prone to failing and give imprecise
measurements due to rust, see appendix C.
Figure 5.3: Installed displacement transducer between bridge and bridge landing. Pic­
tures originates from internal report[35].
The wave radar (WAV), see Figure 5.4, provides a WAVE metric that contains the distance
from the radar position on the platform to the water surface. The data from the wave radar
can be supplemented with data from a buoy located about 15 kilometers away.
Figure 5.4: Wave radar installed on the East Platform. Picture originates from internal
report[35].
5.1.1
Processing of Sensor & Radar Data
The .acq files are binary files used in RigSys systems for offshore SHM. The files are
in non­human readable format. Therefore, it is required to parse the files with a specific
parsing process. The .acq files contains a header with various information about the data
they contain, the number of channels, and sample interval amongst other information.
To parse the .acq files a Python parser has been created that uses a .acq reader script
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
19
==PAGE:28==
provided by Rambøll. This parser takes a folder as input and converts the content to
Apache Parquet to make it easier to data engineering with. Apache Parquet was chosen
as the format due to the columnar storage format, which offers significant performance
advantages when handling large­scale data, especially in analytics and machine learn­
ing workflows. Its efficient compression and encoding schemes also reduce both storage
footprint and I/O overhead. This allows faster data loading and transformation processes.
Once the .acq files are parsed and stored as Parquet, each dataset can be programmat­
ically analyzed for sensor­specific patterns, anomalies, or trends. Parquet was chosen
over CSV mostly due to its natural file based Database­esque setup that translates nicely
from the hourly incremented files that the RigSys files were provided in.
Sensor Down­sampling & Low Pass Filtering
To bring the raw sensor streams into a size that is usable for exploratory analysis and
machine­learning pipelines, every channel is resampled from its native 128 Hz format
down to 32 Hz. The motivation for resampling the data is to reduce the computational
and storage overhead that is seen with the 128 Hz sampling rate. For most applications
in exploratory analysis and machine learning, there is no significant benefit to maintaining
the full 128 Hz resolution, as the signals of interest typically sit well below 16 Hz. A
reduced rate of 32 Hz holds all relevant motion and strain features while also significantly
decreasing data volume and processing time.
This process of resampling involves decimation, which is a two­step process: first, the
signal is passed through a low­pass filter to remove high­frequency components that could
cause aliasing (e.g., error or distortion in the signal), and then it is down­sampled by
keeping only every Nth sample. In this case, with a decimation factor of 4 (from 128 Hz
to 32 Hz), every 4th sample is retained.
The data conversion pipeline uses the scipy.signal.decimate function with its default
Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filter. This function employs an 8th­order Chebyshev Type
I filter, which is designed for a steep roll­off to effectively prevent aliasing.[36] This filter­
ing is performed with zero­phase characteristics to avoid time distortion by processing
the signal forwards and then backwards.[36] This function is highly optimized, combin­
ing filtering and down­sampling in a computationally efficient manner, which can improve
throughput by a factor of 5­6x without a measurable degradation in pass­band fidelity.
All channels of a sensor are processed simultaneously in a vectorized arrangement, lever­
aging CPU vector instructions through batched operations. This shared­path filtering both
minimizes cache misses and ensures a consistent phase response across correlated
axes, such as the three­component accelerometers. The data is resampled to float32
to reduce the memory footprint while preserving the dynamic range, which is sufficient for
capturing the structural responses being measured.
Wave Radar
The raw data from the wave radar, which measures the distance from the radar to the
sea surface at a 10 Hz sampling rate, is processed to get environmental parameters that
characterizes wave properties. These parameters, specifically the significant wave height
(Hs) and the peak wave period (Tp), are calculated for each of the hour­long WAVE .acq
files, see Section 3.5.
Additional Data from Buoy 15 km away for Wave Direction
20 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:29==
As a single wave radar can only measure the vertical distance to the surface, and not
determine the direction from which the waves are coming from, we need to source the
wave direction data from elsewhere. A nearby buoy located approximately 15 kilometers
from the offshore structure is able to provide this data. Buoys are standard instruments
for measuring directional wave data, typically using a combination of accelerometers and
compasses to track their motion in response to waves[34]. This directional wave data is
retrieved from an InfluxDB time­series database and integrated with the processed wave
parameters Hs and Tp.
The wave direction data is collected in one­hour intervals. As shown in Figure 5.5, the
dominant wave direction is towards west, with some larger bins towards north west and
south west. To get additional data to improve the performance of the ML model, linear
interpolation of the wave direction data was applied. Figure 5.6 shows the wave direc­
tion centered around the mean on a scatterplot, with each point representing one hour.
This plot shows that the waves generally change gradually over time, with some larger
shifts between the hours. There are no extreme discontinuities that would make linear
interpolation unreliable for these 3 months of data from 2020. Therefore, applying linear
interpolation (with circular interpolation for angular data) to increase data size is appro­
priate for this dataset. The tolerance for wave direction variability is set by Rambøll to a
relatively large value of ±45◦. This leaves plenty of space for tolerance in the natural fluc­
tuations in the captured data and the interpolated wave directions that attempt to imitate
the wave direction.
To enable proper development of a wave estimation model an Apache Parquet datastore
has been created for the wave data of 5 minute intervals with Hs, Tp, and wave_dir. The
wave_dir data is interpolated from an one­hour interval to a 5 minute interval. Increasing
the number of data points per one­hour file can affect Hs for a less meaningful result. The
processed data from the wave radar and the wave direction from the buoy, are stored in
a separate Apache Parquet datastore to avoid contamination with the other data used for
other applications.
5.2
Exploratory Data Analysis
The offshore monitoring data contains a mix of structural responses (accelerations,
strains, displacements) and environmental forcing (wave radar measurements). To prop­
erly characterize the behavior of the system, the analysis should be carried out in both the
time domain and the frequency domain. Each of the domains provides complementary
insights: the time domain reflects the raw dynamics and transient (short­lived) events,
while the frequency domain reveals oscillatory patterns, resonances, and the distribution
of energy across frequencies.
Considering both together gives a fuller picture of the
interaction between the structure and its environment.
From a machine learning perspective, analyzing both domains is also important for ef­
fective feature extraction and model performance. Time­domain features (e.g., mean,
variance, RMS, peaks, and other statistical measures) capture temporary and transient
behaviors. Frequency­domain features derived from Fourier or Welch analysis highlight
resonance behavior, spectral shifts, and energy distributions, with Welch’s method offer­
ing improved robustness by reducing noise variance. Considering features from both of
the domains can produce a richer and more reliable input set, which in turn improves the
accuracy and generalization of ML models for offshore monitoring.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.5: Directional rose of wave approach directions (10° bins; 0° = North, clockwise),
showing dominant arrivals from W­NW ( 260­300°) with a secondary mode near N­NNE
( 350°).
Figure 5.6: Time series scatterplot of wave direction deviations (relative to mean direc­
tion 275.6°) from February to April 2020, showing periodic directional shifts. Some shifts
exceeding 100°, indicating alternating dominance of different wave systems or changing
wind directions
22 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:31==
5.2.1
Time Domain
On Figure 5.7 a typical plot one hour plot of the ACC_3_E sensor can be seen. The
data used for this plot already have an 8th order Chebyshev filter applied as a denoiser
from the scipy.signal.decimate module using the iir ftype. Even with this filter, the
time domain of the data appears incredibly noisy. The signal oscillates rapidly around
a mean value going up and down repeatedly, with amplitude fluctuations that makes it
hard to visually identify specific events, underlying trends, or any distinct patterns. This
high level of noise in the data masks the characteristics of the structural response that
is buried within the signal. While larger events like a sudden shock to the structure is
visible as a sharp peak, the dynamic behavior of the structure remains hard to interpret
from this view alone. From a machine learning perspective the time domain is important
for extracting statistical features that quantify the behaviour of the signal. Metrics such as
mean, variance, kurtosis etc. can capture different aspects of the signal even when it is
visually challenging[37].
Figure 5.7: Time Series plot of ACC_3_E for one hour
5.2.2
Frequency Domain
Fourier Transform
The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) and its efficient implementation, the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT), are the fundamental tools for frequency analysis.
By decomposing
time­series signals into sine wave components, they reveal the spectrum of frequencies
present in the sensor data. FFT is particularly useful for exploratory analysis and provides
a straightforward way to detect periodicity, resonance peaks, and harmonics[38]. This is
particularly useful for identifying the natural resonant frequencies of the offshore plat­
form, which appear as distinct peaks in the spectrum. Analyzing the frequency spectrum
obtained from the FFT of the platform’s sensor data reveals how the offshore structure re­
sponds at different frequencies. Compared to the time­domain plot, the frequency­domain
representation makes it significantly easier to identify, compare, and interpret the struc­
tural behavior across the different available sensors.
Welch’s Method and Power Spectral Density (PSD)
The FFT is powerful, but its results can be ”noisy,” meaning the spectral estimate can have
a high variance that makes it difficult to see the true structural resonant peaks from random
fluctuations in the signal. Welch’s method is a more advanced technique that produces a
smoother and more reliable estimate of the Power Spectral Density (PSD)[24].
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
23
==PAGE:32==
Welch’s method is a type of PSD estimation technique and works by firstly dividing the
one­hour signal into multiple smaller overlapping windows. An FFT is calculated for each
window, and the resulting power spectra are then averaged together. This averaging
process significantly reduces the unwanted noise and produces a much cleaner PSD es­
timate that better represents the frequency content of the signal. This estimate is impor­
tant for understanding the dynamics of the offshore structure because it quantifies how
the signal’s energy is distributed. For example, broad high­energy regions in the low­
frequency range typically correspond to structural loading from ocean waves, whereas
peaks at higher frequencies can indicate the structure’s natural modes of vibration[24].
On Figure 5.8, it is seen that applying Welch’s method to the accelerometer from the
offshore structure data reveals some sharp and distinct peaks. These peaks, which were
completely hidden by noise in the time­domain plot (Figure 5.7), are linked to the dominant
frequencies which the structure is vibrating in. The ability to clearly identify these resonant
frequencies is a fundamental aspect to SHM. This is because changes in their location or
amplitude can indicate shifts in the structure’s physical properties (e.g. through fatigue)
or some type of damage. An example of how a broken sensor looks can be seen on
Appendix A. The Welch PSD Estimate on Figure 5.8 is scaled with a base 10 log. See
Appendix B for a comparison with and without log.
Figure 5.8: ACC_1_E sensor Welch PSD Estimate with log10 scale applied
5.3
System Configuration
The hardware and software environment used for the research, testing, and development
throughout this thesis is detailed below. This configuration is highly powerful consumer
hardware and ensures high performance and stability during the computationally intensive
tasks:
• Processor: AMD Ryzen 7 9800X3D ­ 8 cores / 16 threads
• Graphics Card: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5090
• Memory: 32 GB G.SKILL DDR5 @ 6000 MT/s
• Operating System: Windows 11
– NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit Version: 12.9
24 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:33==
5.4
Ethical Considerations
The use of SHM data from offshore structures requires some attention to data ownership,
confidentiality, and responsible research practice. The dataset, provided by Rambøll,
remains their property and is used solely for academic purpose. Platform identifiers are
anonymized to avoid security or operational risks to Rambøll and the offshore asset holder.
Although no personal data is included, secure storage and controlled access ensure data
integrity and compliance with general protection principles. Since offshore monitoring
relates to structural safety and environmental protection, the research is framed to support
safer designs and reduced risk of failures.
Moreover, the use of AI approaches in SHM data analysis introduces additional ethical
considerations. Under the EU Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689)[39],
the AI components developed and applied in this research can be categorized as part
of High­Risk AI systems, as defined in Annex III, Section 2, which includes “AI systems
intended to be used as safety components in the management and operation of critical
digital infrastructure, road traffic, or in the supply of water, gas, heating or electricity.”[39]
Offshore structures, being critical components of the gas infrastructure, fall within this
classification. Therefore, this research recognizes and is aware of EU AI Act, but it does
not directly apply to academic or exploratory research. The company, Rambøll, is aware
of the regulations in regards to potentially putting the system into production.
On a final note, all data processing and analysis steps are documented transparently, with
limitations acknowledged to prevent overstated conclusions. This ensures that the work
respects ownership, supports sustainability, and upholds the academic integrity.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
25
==PAGE:34==
26 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:35==
6
Implementation
The implementation of the models has been done using Python as programming lan­
guage and the use of the libraries PyTorch, NumPy, HDBSCAN, scikit­learn, and more.
See Table 6.1 for the primary libraries used. PyTorch was selected over Tensorflow due
to the wider community support in the research area, and better flexibility for smaller scale
projects. Jupyter Notebooks have been used to experiment, validate, and test using Mat­
plotlib and Plotly for visualization.
Table 6.1: Python libraries primarily used for implementation of the machine learning mod­
els and inference.
Library
Purpose
PyArrow
Parquet file metadata extraction and schema inspection to deter­
mine available channels without loading full datasets.
NumPy
Creates multi­channel arrays, performs element­wise and reduc­
tion operations efficiently, feature array storage (float32), times­
tamp handling, and efficient sliding window indexing
Pandas
Reading parquet files as DataFrames, time series manipulation,
timestamp sorting, and structured data handling for sensor mea­
surements
SciPy (+ sklearn)
For doing PSD estimation using Welch’s method, data preprocess­
ing (e.g. StandardScaler), and more.
PyTorch
Open­source deep learning framework used to build, train, and de­
ploy neural networks for applications like computer vision, value
prediction, etc.
HDBSCAN
Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with
Noise for unsupervised operational state identification with auto­
matic cluster number detection
To ensure documentation and reproducibility of the machine learning experimentation per­
formed during the development of all three research areas, a logging setup has been put
into place. This setup uses Python’s standard logging module to capture and store rele­
vant information during the training process. For each training run a directory is created
and timestamped with the current date and time (e.g. run_20231027_143000). This helps
preventing overwriting the previous results and enables a clear record of all the runs.
Each run has their own training.log file. Scaler configs, and models are also saved in
these folders if they have concluded successfully. All development and experimentation
was carried out on the system configuration described in Section 5.3.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
27
==PAGE:36==
6.1
Sensor Fault Detection
This section details the implementation of the sensor fault detection pipeline that has been
built. This implementation uses data parsing, preprocessing, spectral feature extraction,
model development, and training.
6.1.1
Design goals and Rationale
The design of the sensor fault detection system is guided by the challenges of the off­
shore environment. This are the lack of labeled fault data and the stochastic nature of the
environment.
Due to the diverse number of sensor faults, as shown in Table 3.1, and the difficulty manu­
ally being able to identify them, creating a balanced dataset for supervised learning is im­
practical. The methodology used has therefore adopted an unsupervised autoencoder[40]
approach. Training on only healthy data, the model learns the underlying patterns of nor­
mal structural behavior. This allows flagging any anomalous data that results in a high
reconstruction error as anomalous, thus eliminating the need for a comprehensive dataset
of sensor failures.
As explained in Section 5.2, raw time­series data from the offshore structure has a lot of
noise. This noise can hide sensor degradation. To address this, the frequency­domain
has been used as basis. Transforming the signal into the frequency domain essentially
isolated the important structural signatures from the noise. For this platform, the structural
response is characterized by oscillations in the 0.5­2 Hz range, see Figure 5.8. These
resonant peaks act as stable and informative features, providing a more reliable basis for
the model to learn from.
The Sensor Fault Detection training pipeline has been developed in such a way that a
model can be trained for a single sensor or across multiple sensors wherever applicable.
The rationale is that some sensors have a shared goal, for example, the displacement
transducers both measure the bridge displacement relative to a bridge landing, where it
makes sense to train them together for functional reasons.
6.1.2
Model Architecture
For this implementation a 1D convolutional autoencoder has been chosen. A convolu­
tional neural network (CNN) is a class of deep learning model designed to operate on
grid­structured data (e.g. images, time series, or spectral arrays). It uses learnable con­
volutional filters that slide over the input to detect local patterns while preserving spatial or
temporal relationships. The core idea of using CNNs is the use of its convolutional layers
that applies learnable filters called kernels across the input data. These filters are made
in such a way that they can automatically detect local patterns. For a 1D spectrum a filter
might learn to recognize the shape of a resonant peak or a series of harmonics[41]. An
autoencoder is an unsupervised neural network that learns a compressed representation
of the input data. It consists of an encoder that maps the input to a lower­dimensional
latent space, and a decoder that reconstructs the original input the representation in the
latent space. The autoencoder is trained on healthy sensor data, and thus it learns to re­
construct normal patterns effectively. When the model is presented with anomalous data,
which is different from the learned patterns, the model will output a result with a large
reconstruction error and therefore signal a potential fault[40, 42].
The architecture is based on three main parts: an encoder, a latent space bottleneck, and
a decoder. See Figure 6.1.
28 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.1: 1D Convolutional Autoencoder: the encoder reduces the feature dimension
through stacked Conv1D­BN­ReLU blocks (where BN is BatchNormalization1D, and LD
is latent dimensions), the bottleneck maps features to and from a latent vector, and the
decoder mirror reconstructs the original input shape
Encoder
The encoder’s goal is to progressively transform raw input data into higher level, more
abstract representations (hierarchical feature extraction) by increasing number of feature
maps while also compressing it into a lower­dimensional space (dimensionality reduc­
tion). This makes the data easier to process, store, and use for tasks like classification,
generation, or reconstruction[40].
The encoder is built with four Conv1d layers. Several design choices are made:
Kernel sizes (7 and 5): Larger kernels (kernel_size=7) are used in the first two encoder
layers to capture broader spectral patterns such as the overall shape and width of major
resonance peaks. The last two layers use smaller kernels (kernel_size=5), since their
feature maps already represent broader input regions. The smaller kernels are adequate
for combining these abstracted features into more complex patterns. This progression
from large to small kernels is a common design principle to capture different aspect of the
data[41].
Padding: Same­padding is applied to preserve feature map length across layers. For
kernel_size=7, padding is set to 3, while for kernel_size=5, padding is set to 2. This
help preventing unwanted shrinking of feature maps and allows dimensionality reduction
to be controlled by the strides.
Stride: Strided convolutions are used for downsampling. Stride decides the how many
steps the kernel moves each time it slides. A stride of 2 halves the feature map length,
making the encoder more efficient compared to separate pooling operations. This allows
the filters to learn both feature extraction and downsampling at the same time.
Each of the convolutions is followed by a BatchNorm1d and ReLU activation. Batch nor­
malization assists in stabilizing the training by normalizing the activations. This enables
larger stable learning rates and adds some mild regularization[41]. ReLU introduces non­
linearity, mitigates the vanishing gradient problem (as typically seen with the sigmoid ac­
tivation function), and is computationally more efficient[43]. For memory optimization,
activations use inplace=True.
Latent space and the bottleneck
After the convolutional feature extraction, the encoder output is flattened and passed
through connected layers. The bottleneck has been implemented as a sequence of two
linear layers with a ReLU in between them ((Linear -> ReLU -> Linear)). This provides
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
29
==PAGE:38==
a non­linear projection into the latent space, allowing a more expressive mapping than a
single linear layer.
To avoid overfitting, a small dropout (Dropout(0.05)) is applied in the bottleneck. Ran­
domly zeroing out 5% of the units during training, the model is encouraged to learn more
redundant and stronger encodings[44].
Decoder
The decoder has to symmetrically mirror the encoder, thus reversing the compression
process of the encoder. It uses the ConvTranspose1d layers which is the natural counter­
part to convolutions for upsampling. With stride=2, the transposed convolutions approx­
imately double the feature map length, effectively reversing the encoder’s downsampling.
Kernel sizes, padding, and strides mirror the encoder to ensure symmetry between input
and output.
Hyperparameter Selection
The selection of hyperparameters defines the resolution of the input data and the com­
pression capability of the model.
The window size of the model was set to 512 samples. This amounts to 16 seconds of
data at a sampling rate of 32 Hz. This sampling rate was selected based on trial and
error for the best sample size. The trade­off here is between frequency resolution and
the signal stationary (whether its statistical properties stay the same over time). If the
window is too short there will not be enough samples for a reliable spectral estimate, so
the frequency features becomes noisy or unstable. If the window is too long, on the other
hand, the signal may not be stationary. Choosing 512 samples provides enough data to
estimate frequencies well while still keeping the signal approximately stationary over the
window, as structural vibration data is inherently non­stationary over long periods.
The latent dimension size was set to 96 to get the model to learn the data without having
the model just simply memorize the input. While less or more also give decent results
testing the model and doing parameter tuning eventually landed at 96 as a good number
of latent dimensions for the autoencoder. For the ACC with 3 channels there would be a
total of 771 features and the compression ratio for the bottleneck would then be about 8 to
1. This is tight enough for the model to be able to learn the complex correlations between
the channels of the input.
Spectral Representation as a Feature
To transform the time­series sensor data into the frequency domain, the Real Fast Fourier
Transform (rFFT) is utilized. The rFFT is an efficient algorithm to compute the discrete
Fourier transform of a real­valued signal[45]. To stabilize the variance and make the
features more robust against noise, the log­magnitude of the rFFT is taken. As we have
established previously, the raw magnitude spectrum of accelerometer is typically very
high at some frequencies while almost invisible relative to the high peaks in other areas.
The neural network seems to struggle using input data with a large dynamic range as it
seems large peaks can suppress the learnings of smaller peaks. To address this a log­
magnitude is applied. This compresses the dynamic range and allows the model to learn
features across the entire frequency band more effectively. Ultimately, this process assist
in extracting meaningful features from the raw sensor signals for the autoencoder to learn
from. The use of frequency­domain analysis is a common technique in vibration­based
structural health monitoring[4]. This representation allows the model to identify subtle
30 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:39==
shifts in the frequency spectrum that may be indicative of structural changes or sensor
malfunctions.
1D Frequency Representation vs. Spectrograms
Spectrograms add a time axis and require more compute, yet the goal is to learn per­
window spectral structure for fault detection. 1D over frequency captures resonances,
harmonics, and broadband energy shifts with far fewer parameters and faster training. It
also avoids design choices around hop size and spectrogram windowing. This makes the
1D CNN approach better than using a 2D CNN for this task.
Hann Windowing
Before applying the rFFT, a Hann (also known as Hanning) Windowing function is applied
to each segment of the time­series data. A window function is a mathematical function
that is zero­valued outside of a chosen interval and is used to taper the signal at its edges.
The Hann window is named after Julius von Hann and is a taper formed by a cosine that
smoothly reduces the signal amplitude to zero at the beginning and end of the window
[46]. The reason for using any windowing function is to reduce spectral leakage where dis­
continuity occurs. The Fast Fourier Transform assumes that the data within the window
is a single period of a periodic (continuous) signal. The use of the Fast Fourier Trans­
form assumes that the data used within the window is periodic, meaning that the data
is continuous without any discontinuity breaks. If the data is non­periodic then unwanted
representations of frequencies will be shown in the spectrum, this effect is known as spec­
tral leakage. The need for using a windowing function comes as seen rarely some of the
data retrieved from Google Cloud Storage is corrupted or broken.
The downside of Hann Windowing is that it can slightly reduce the frequency resolution,
but it does improve the amplitude accuracy of the detected frequency components. For
this application, although the training data in this case appears periodic, it cannot always
be guaranteed. Data may be taken from different periods of time, and sensors may intro­
duce unwanted artifacts and disruptions that are not fully addressed during decimation or
at the boundaries of the chosen window sizes. In some cases, corrupt .acq files resulted
in an hour of missing data. Applying the Hann Windowing function helps to mitigate and
minimize the impact of non­periodic effects on the spectrum the model relies on.
Use of StandardScaler
A StandardScaler from scikit-learn is used to standardize the features by removing
the mean and scaling them to the unit variance (variance of data is equal to 1). The
standard score of a given sample is calculated as z = (x −µ)/σ where µ is the mean of
the samples, σ is the standard deviation, and x is the value being scaled. This essentially
means that the data is being centered around zero[47]. The StandardScaler is applied
to the rFFT bins is to ensure that the importance of the frequency bands represented is
equal.
The process of using the StandardScaler helps to ensure that our features contributes
equally to the model’s learning process. This prevents features with larger variances
dominating the object function[47]. In this case for the sensor fault detection, as an ex­
ample, have the ACC sensors where there is less variance on vertical channel compared
to the north and east channels. Without standardization, the model might incorrectly as­
sign more ”importance” to the N and E directions. By scaling all of the features to have a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1, StandardScaler mitigates this issue and helps
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
31
==PAGE:40==
the model learn a more balanced and accurate representation of the underlying data dis­
tribution[48].
Activation Function (ReLU)
The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) is used as the activation function in every convolutional
layer. ReLU uses the function f(x) = max(0, x) where it zeroes out the negative values
while keeping positive values unchanged[43]. For this autoencoder setup, ReLU was
selected due to its advantages in deep convolutional networks:
1. Non­linearity: As with other activation functions ReLU introduces non­linearity, al­
lowing the model to learn complex spectral boundaries that a linear model could not
capture.
2. Better Gradient Updates: Unlike sigmoid or tanh functions, ReLU does not have
issues with the vanishing gradient problem in the positive domain, and therefore it
ensures that the weights in the deeper layers of the encoder are updated effectively
during backpropagation.
3. Sparsity: By outputting zero for all negative inputs, ReLU induces sparsity in the
layers, which can improve the model’s generalization speed by more efficient and
faster computation. Sparsity means that a fraction of the neurons activate at a time.
6.1.3
Training Strategy
The training process is designed to minimize the reconstruction error between the input
spectrum and the decoder output, so it can be used for the sensor fault detection.
Loss Function
To understand the performance of the reconstructions, the Mean Squared Error (MSE)
loss function is used. MSE takes the squared difference between the estimated values
(the decoder output) and the actual value (the encoder input). Mathematically it is defined
as[49]:
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(ˆyi −yi)2
Where n is the total number of samples, ˆyi is the predicted value, and yi is the actual
value. MSE is good for this application because it heavily penalizes larger errors than
smaller due to the square. For this model using spectral features it means that peaks that
are not reconstructed well will result in a significant error, thus favoring creating a model
that is able to reconstruct the larger peaks well compared to the smaller ones.
Optimization Algorithm
For optimizer the Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) optimizer has been selected.
Adam takes the advantages of Momentum and RMSProp and enables highly performant
learning at high efficiency[50]. Using Adam allows the model to converge faster on a
minima thus allowing less training time and better accuracy. Adam is significantly better
than Stochastic Gradient Descent (SDG) and the momentum based version of SDG.
Regularization and Early Stopping
To make sure the model generalizes well to unseen data and prevent overfitting, which is
where the model memorizes the data and noise instead of learning the underlying struc­
tural patterns, a few different regularization techniques and training strategies was imple­
mented.
32 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:41==
First, a dropout was used with a rate of 0.05. This was applied within the bottleneck of
the autoencoder. The dropout of 0.05 randomly sets 5% elements of the input of the
bottleneck layer to zero. This prevents the model from relying too much on any specific
neuron and forces the network to learn more reliable features[44].
Next, a weight decay (also known as L2 regularization) is applied. This was done through
the Adam optimizer with a weight of 0.00005. This acts as a layer of regularization by
adding a penalty to large weights in the model. The motivation of using weight decay is
enabling the model to use a wider range of input features instead of relying too heavily on
a few input features. This way the model will generalize better on unseen data[44].
Finally, instead of training on a specific number of epochs, an early stopping mechanism
was implemented. The performance of the model is evaluated based on the validation
set at the end of every epoch. If the validation loss does not improve within a number
of epochs (the patience counter), the training is stopped, and the result with the best
evaluation on the validation test is taken as the result. Using early stopping enables
getting a final model that is best at generalizing to unseen data rather the model that
simply just minimizes the training loss the most.
6.2
Operational Mode Labelling
The operational labelling has been implemented using Hierarchical Density­Based Spa­
tial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN). This clustering approach was se­
lected due to their ability to differentiate between different states effectively, and is good
for adding additional business logic on top of (e.g. grouping clusters or expanding clus­
tered data).
6.2.1
Selection of Clustering Algorithm
HDBSCAN was chosen over other clustering algorithms for three reasons. First, unlike
methods such as K­Means, HDBSCAN does not require specifying the number of clusters
in advance. HDBSCAN determines the optimal number of clusters dynamically, similar
to DBSCAN. Second, HDBSCAN is very effective at handling noisy data, making it a
good choice for this environment where our data comes from as there is a high degree
of randomness and uncertainty present. Finally, its hierarchical approach enables the
clustering algorithm to construct a hierarchy of clusters and extract the most stables ones.
This allows HDBSCAN to both find large, well­defined clusters and smaller, more specific
clusters[30]. In Table 6.2 a comparison of three clustering algorithms can be found.
Table 6.2: Comparison of clustering algorithms for finding operational states in noisy SHM
data. HDBSCAN best matches requirements: no need to set K, reliable noise handling,
support for arbitrary shapes and variable densities, and stability via hierarchy­based se­
lection.
Algorithm
Needs K
Shape
Noise handling
Var. density
Notes for this use case
K­Means
Yes
Spherical (Euclidean)
Poor
No
Requires K; favors large spherical blobs; merges
subtle/short events into baseline; sensitive to
scale/outliers[51].
DBSCAN
No
Arbitrary shapes
Good
No
Strong on noise and shapes, but single ε strug­
gles with clusters at different densities; misses
small, sparse events[52].
HDBSCAN
No
Arbitrary shapes
Excellent
Yes
Builds a density hierarchy and extracts stable
clusters (EOM/leaf) without K; explicit noise la­
bel; handles uneven cluster densities; provides
membership probabilities.
Well­suited for sub­
tle, intermittent operations amid substantial back­
ground noise[30].
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
33
==PAGE:42==
6.2.2
How HDBSCAN works
The HDBSCAN clustering algorithm is an extension to DBSCAN[53] and works by trans­
forming input data into a space where density matters, rather than just distance. First,
it computes a core distance for each point, which is how far a point must go to find a
specified number of neighbours around that point. Then it defines a mutual­reachability
distance between pairs of points which is the maximum of the core distances of those two
points and the direct distance between them. Next, HDBSCAN builds a graph (minimum
spanning tree) over all the points using the mutual­reachability distances as weights. This
links each point to other points in a way that allows density based connectivity. From this
tree, a hierarchy of cluster is formed by removing the longest edges, splitting clusters as
the distance threshold increases and density declines. This gives a full hierarchy of clus­
ters at multiple density levels. HDBSCAN then selects a flat partitioning (a final, one­level
clustering chosen from the hierarchy using cluster stability) of the data by looking at the
stability of clusters across levels of hierarchy. A cluster is considered more stable if it
only changes little to none over a range of density thresholds and contains enough points
for much of that range. The most stable clusters are chosen, and data points that do not
belong to any stable cluster are considered as noise[54, 30].
6.2.3
Feature Engineering for the Clusters
The performance of HDBSCAN is very reliant on a relatively low number of dimensionality
of the input data. There is a general recommendation to keep the feature count below 50
to avoid the ”curse of dimensionality” and ensure that HDBSCAN can perform meaningful
density calculations[54]. Therefore, an important step before clustering was to perform
some feature engineering with the primary goal of reducing the feature set without los­
ing critical information about the platform’s operational state. Between the sensors that
are available for operational mode labelling only the accelerometers are really useful.
The strain gauges are too localized in one specific area of the bridge to tell much about
the state of the platform across different areas, and a similar problem is present for the
displacement transducers. The accelerometers, as previously mentioned, has a total of
18 channels, which means that using the raw values fits well within the threshold of 50
features.
As previously established the time­domain signals have a high degree of noise, thus mak­
ing it difficult to find distinct operational patterns, as it can get drowned in noise. For effec­
tive clustering, it is a necessity to engineer features that are more stable and can clearly
show a dominant state of normal operation from other operational modes. To achieve
this, I transitioned from the time domain to the frequency domain, using power spectral
density (PSD) analysis. Four specific frequency bands were selected to isolate different
aspect of the platform’s behavior: the 0.05­0.5 Hz band was chosen to capture the plat­
form’s response to wave loading, while the 0.5­0.8 Hz band contains the fundamental
structural resonant frequencies of the platform. The 0.8­0.9 Hz band is of particular inter­
est for Rambøll in detecting unforeseen ”shivering” events, and the 0.9­2 Hz band is used
to monitor other structural responses. However, this method of splitting the frequency do­
main for each of the 18 channels expanded the feature set to 72, thus heavily surpassing
the recommended dimensionality threshold for HDBSCAN.
To handle this issue there was an initial strategy for dimensionality reduction to investi­
gate the possibility of merging data from physically co­located sensors. For example, by
combining signals from ACC 1 and 2 on the south platform, ACC 3 and 4 on the bridge,
and ACC 5 and 6 on the east platform. To assess the viability of this approach, the Pear­
son correlation coefficient was calculated (using pandas.DataFrame.corr) between the
34 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:43==
time­series data of different accelerometer channels. Pearson correlation measures the
linear relationship between two variables, where a value of +1 or ­1 indicates a perfect
linear relationship, and 0 indicates no linear correlation[55].
Figure 6.2: Comparison of Pearson correlation matrices between vertical (V­V), north
(N­N), and east (E­E) acceleration components across ACC channels. Warmer colors
indicate stronger positive correlations, while cooler colors represent negative correlations.
The results, as shown in Figure 6.2, show that the correlation between most of the sensor
pairs is not consistently high enough to justifty merging them into a single representative
feature. Even with some of the sensor axes showing moderate positive correlation it is not
uniform across the sensor pairs on the platforms and bridge. An interesting observation is
the strong negative correlation between the east channels of ACC 3 and 4 located on the
bridge. This suggests that they may be capturing opposing phases of the same motion,
but this does not seem to be a general pattern as performing the same correlation study
on these two sensors from data from another time in 2020 shows them being positively
correlated. Given the lack of strong, widespread correlation, the decision was made to
not merge sensors, as this could lead to significant information loss. A correlation matrix
across all accelerometers can be found in Appendix F.
A second, and more effective strategy involved removing features based on domain
knowledge of the platform’s structural dynamics. Analysis and discussion with domain
experts from Rambøll revealed that the vertical (V) acceleration components showed
significantly less variance and fewer distinct patterns compared to the north (N) and east
(E) components. The horizontal channels are more sensitive to the structural response
driven by the environmental loads like waves and wind, and operational modes on the
platform. This means that the vertical channels were excluded from the feature set due
to their less informative impact on operational states.
This decision effectively reduced the feature set by a third, bringing the dimensionality
within an usable range for HDBSCAN while retaining the most important information for
clustering operational modes.
Dimensionality Reduction Methods
An initial attempt was made at using PCA to reduce the feature dimensionality. Unfor­
tunately, using PCA caused the clusters to become less distinct in such a way that the
overall noise increased with smaller operational modes that were captured ended up be­
ing captured by either the dominant cluster or the noise cluster (­1). While the non­linear
methods like UMAP or t­SNE could potentially preserve cluster structure better, in this
case, initial experiments and data characteristics suggested that reducing the feature set
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
35
==PAGE:44==
directly through more direct methods provided a better separation than dimensionality­
reduction approaches, so there was a focus on feature selection instead.
6.2.4
Development of HDBSCAN Pipeline
The HDBSCAN pipeline has been developed using some libraries to transform the sensor
data into meaningful operational state labels. The process, as shown in Figrue 6.3, is
designed to be automated and reproducible. It handles everything from data input to
saving the final cluster and model. The Pandas library is for data manipulation, SciPy for
signal processing, NumPy for efficient numerical computation, and the hdbscan library for
the clustering itself.
The pipeline loads the converted Parquet accelerometer data into a Pandas DataFrame,
semgents the time series into overlapping windows. In this case the windows are of
a length of 60 seconds with 50% overlap. Each window is converted into PSD using
Welch’s method for all 12 channels. Power is then integrated within four frequency bands
(0.05­0.5, 0.5­0.8, 0.8­0.9, 0.9­2 Hz), producing a 48­dimensional feature vector per win­
dow. HDBSCAN then clusters the feature matrix using parameters like min_cluster_size,
returning cluster labels and membership probabilities (with the ”−1” label reserved for
noise).
The length of the windows is set to 60 seconds to get as many possible clusters as pos­
sible. Reducing the windows to less than 60 seconds can affect the stability of the PSD’s
created and make the clustering unreliable. min_sample and min_cluster_size are both
set to 6. min_sample is used to determine if a point is a core point based on how many
neighbours there atleast need to be within a certain distance. min_cluster_size deter­
mines how large a cluster needs to be to be considered a cluster.
Parquet
Data Reader
(read_parquet_df)
Library: Pandas
Windowing Module
60s windows,
50% overlap
∼195K windows
Frequency Analysis
Welch’s PSD Method
Library: SciPy
Frequency Band
Integration
4 bands: 0.05­0.5,
0.5­0.8, 0.8­0.9, 0.9­2 Hz
12 ACC channels × 4
bands = 48 features
Feature Preprocessing
Option for Log transform
and Robust scaling
Library: NumPy
HDBSCAN Clustering
min_cluster_size=6
Library: hdbscan
Operational State Labels
Clusters + noise
with probabilities
Operational Labelling Pipeline
Figure 6.3: Overview of the operational labelling pipeline for accelerometer data, showing
each processing stage from Apache Parquet input to clustered operational states.
36 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:45==
6.3
Wave Estimation
The primary objective of developing the wave estimation model is to predict significant
wave height (Hs), peak wave period (Tp), and the wave direction. This is achieved by
taking accelerometer (ACC) data as input and producing these three key wave parameters
as output. The methodology for determining Hs, Tp, and wave direction is detailed in the
Theoretical Framework chapter (see Section 3.5).
6.3.1
Choice of Model Architecture
The problem is a good multi­output regression task on time­series data. A CNN was
chosen as the model architecture. CNNs are mostly known for their use in computer
vision and image related machine learning, but 1D CNNs are very good for analyzing
sequential data like sensor readings[26]. As we know from the Sensor Fault Detection
setup in section 6.1, the core principle is using a sliding kernel over the time sequence to
detect temporal patterns (like oscillations, peaks, and signal shapes) and to extract feature
representations that the model can use to understand and map structural interactions with
the target output values.
Multi­Output Regression
Multi­output regression, also known as multi­target regression, is a supervised learning
approach where a single model is trained to predict multiple output variables at the same
time[56]. This is in contrast to training a separate, independent model for each output.
The multi­output approach was chosen for a few reasons:
• Learning Inter­dependencies: Wave parameters are not independent. For ex­
ample, larger waves might correlate with specific periods. A single, unified model
can learn a shared internal representation of the input signal that captures features
relevant to all outputs. This allows the model to use the physical correlations be­
tween Hs, Tp and direction. This can lead to better overall prediction accuracy, as
instead of solving one specific issue it is instead solving a coupled problem that uses
information that would otherwise be lost.
• Keeping it simple: Training, deploying, and maintaining a single model is far more
efficient than managing multiple independent models.
• Good Fit for Deep Learning: Neural networks are well suited for multi­output tasks.
The architecture can be designed with a shared approach that learns common fea­
tures, branching out only at the final layer to produce the different outputs. In this
case, a single output layer with four neurons produces the predictions for Hs, Tp,
and wave direction (sin(dir) and cos(dir)) in one go.
Training on Raw Data vs. Engineered Features
An important choice was to train the model on the raw accelerometer signals directly. Mul­
tiple feature­engineering approaches were attempted to improve performance, but the
spectral features (rFFT and PSD, including versions engineered for specific frequency
ranges), the time­domain statistical features (mean, maximum, minimum, standard devi­
ation, etc.), and even the raw data all produced roughly the same results within normal
run­to­run variance. This is due to how the CNN works. It is able to learn optimal and
predictive features directly from the data itself. Engineered features can be a bottleneck,
as they represent a human’s hypothesis about what is important in the signal. By using
the raw data, it is allowing the model to discover more complex and subtle patterns that
might be lost or over­simplified by engineered features. This helps in reducing human
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
37
==PAGE:46==
bias and can result in a better and more powerful model when working with a supervised
setup.
Handling Circular Dependency of the Wave Direction
One challenge in predicting wave direction is the fact that a direction is defined on a circle
from 0° to 360° where 359° is immediately next to 0°. Regression models which typically
use loss functions like Mean Square Error (MSE) is not able to handle situations like
this. For example if the direction is 359° and the model predicts 1°, the numerical error
would be an incredibly large 358°. In reality the model prediction was only off by 2°. This
”jump” discontinuity would severely hurt accurate predictions near the 0°/360° boundary
and confuse the model during training.
To resolve this a transformation of the circular direction into a two­dimensional continuous
representation has been used. Any angle θ can be represented by its coordinates (x, y)
on a unit circle, where x = cos(θ) and y = sin(θ). The model is this way not trained
to predict the direction angle directly, but instead these two continuous sine and cosine
components. The advantage of doing this is getting a direction representation that can
change smoothly and that it is compatible with the loss function MSE.
Data Preparation
For the wave estimation pipeline I used two datastores. One for the input data which was
decimated to 4 Hz. The 4 Hz contains the wave­structure interaction from the wave and
the structural response plus some extra space to contain the steep roll off of the IIR noise
filter applied. The other datastore was created for the output or target parameters Hs, Tp,
and the wave direction.
The input data is created by processing the raw accelerometer data in the Apache Parquet
data store. The process involves creating a 300 second (5 minute) window across the
time­series data from selected accelerometer channels. Given the 4 Hz sampling rate,
each window consists of 1200 points of data per channel.
The accelerometer data was chosen for this machine learning application due to the po­
sition of the sensors and the nature of what the accelerometers capture. The alternatives
of using strain gauges or displacement transducers was impracticable due to their very
localized nature of use on the east side of the bridge. The accelerometers are better dis­
persed across the offshore structure and therefore capture a better picture overall of what
is going on, than the strain gauges and displacement transducers can.
The steps for creating single input window for the CNN­Regressor is as follows:
1. Windowing: The code reads an accelerometer data file and segments it into con­
secutive, non­overlapping windows of 1200 samples.
2. Channel Selection: For each window, only data from channels starting with spe­
cific prefixes. A fixed channel order is established from the first processed file and
enforced on all subsequent data to ensure a consistent input shape for the neural
network.
3. Reshaping: The data for each window, originally with shape (1200, num_channels),
is transposed to (num_channels, 1200) to match the standard (Channels, Length)
format expected by PyTorch’s 1D convolutional layers.
The output (or target) data is created by aligning these 5­minute input windows with cor­
responding wave parameters from the wave datastore (datastore_path_wav).
38 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:47==
To prepare the data for the corresponding target a few things has to be done. Firstly, The
start time of each 5­minute accelerometer window is floored to its 5 minute boundary to
ensure the data matches up. While this can in some cases slightly off center the time
relative to the data it is by such a small margin that I still see it as corresponding to the
target. This has to be kept an eye on though if another or larger dataset is used. Secondly,
the alligned timestamp is used find the matching wave data record, which contains the
target values for Hs, Tp and wave direction for that 5 minute interval. Lastly, this is also
the point where the wave direction encoding is done. The final target vector for each input
window is a 4­element array: [Hs, Tp, sin(direction), cos(direction)].
When the complete dataset of input windows and corresponding target vectors is assem­
bled, it is split chronologically into training (70%), validation (15%), and testing (15%) sets.
This split is very important and is to prevent the model from being evaluated on data that
happened before its training data. This is to avoid a situation where the model is trained
on randomly split data and then tested on a window that has happened a some point be­
tween the training data windows, basically allowing it to “look into the future”. This makes
the model instead fill in a blank space in the past and this is a much easier task. This is
called look­ahead bias[57].
Before being fed into the model the data has to undergo some normalization. For the input
data a StandardScaler is used. This scaler calculates the mean and standard deviation
for each feature from the training data, and then uses these statistics to standardize the
training, validation, and test sets. This is so the model learns from a distribution with a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This also helps to prevent information from the
validation and test sets from leaking into the training process. The output data is also
normalized. The Hs and Tp targets are scaled based on the mean and standard deviation
of the values, and is calculated from the training set labels. The values use to scale is
saved in a JSON file to use for inference in the future when denormalize action has to be
performed. The normalization is essentially the same as a StandardScaler from SciKit,
but has been manually implemented for better programmatic control with the targeted
output values. The sin and cos direction components are not directly normalized as they
are inherently well defined on a [−1, 1] scale. This rather selective normalization of the
output targets prevents Tp values from dominating the loss function during training as the
error tends to be higher from Tp.
Loss Function and Optimizer
The training process works by using a combination of loss functions and an adaptive
optimizer to handle the multi­output of wave estimation. The implementation uses func­
tionality of the PyTorch library to ensure a good training setup.
The loss function setup uses multiple loss functions to train the model on all wave pa­
rameters (Hs, Tp, wave direction) while taking into account their different characteristics.
The total loss is a weighted sum of three components. For predicting Hs and Tp, the
torch.nn.SmoothL1Loss (also known as Huber loss) is used. This loss function behaves
like MSE for smaller errors, but transitions to be like Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for larger
errors. This implementation makes the training process less sensitive to occasional out­
liers in the data, which might otherwise create a very large gradient based on MSE loss,
causing a single outlier to trigger a massive, destabilizing update to the weights of the
model that can erase the previous steady learning that had been done from the many
normal data points[58]. For the wave direction that is represented by its sine and cosine
components, a torch.nn.MSELoss is used. This loss function is calculated between the
predicted sine/cosine vector and the true vector. To make sure the model learns to pre­
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
39
==PAGE:48==
dict valid unit vectors, the predicted vector is normalized to unit length before the loss is
computed.
The final loss is calculated within the training loop by summing these, allowing a single
backpropagation step to update the model weights based on the combined error from all
prediction targets ready for next round of training.
Early Stopping and Scheduler for Learning Rate
Similar to the sensor fault detection an early stopping system has been implemented to
prevent overfitting and find an optimal model without running for a long number of epochs,
a combination of early stopping and dynamic learning rate scheduling is implemented.
1. After each epoch the model’s performance is evaluated on the validation set and
gives a validation loss.
2. The best validation loss seen so far is tracked. If the current epoch’s validation loss
is an improvement then a copy of the model’s weights (state_dict) is saved, and
a ”patience” counter (wait) is reset to zero.
3. If the validation loss does not improve, the wait counter is incremented.
4. If the wait counter reaches a predefined patience threshold (e.g., 15 epochs), the
training loop is stopped.
5. After the loop finishes (either by early stopping or completing all epochs), the saved
weights from the best­performing epoch are loaded back into the model, ensuring
the final model is the one that generalized best to the unseen validation data.
With the early stopping, a learning rate scheduler, torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateau,
is used. This scheduler track the validation loss and reduces the learning rate by a pre­
defined factor (in this case it is 0,5) if the loss stagnates for a set number of epochs.
Lowering the learning rate dynamically can help the model make finer and more precise
adjustments to its weights as it get closer to a minimum on the loss. This combination of
using early stopping and learning rate scheduling helps getting the most out of training
without training epochs needlessly.
6.3.2
CNN Architecture
The model has been developed with two main components: a feature extractor composed
of convolutional layers, and a regressor composed of fully connected (linear) layers. The
CNN architecture has been developed using PyTorch, see Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Architecture of the Wave Estimation CNN Model. The model uses a convo­
lutional feature extractor that is composed of four sequential blocks (Conv ­> BatchNorm
­> ReLU ­> Pool), then followed by a fully connected (linear) regressor that maps the
extracted features to the final wave parameter outputs (Hs, Tp, sin(dir), cos(dir))
40 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:49==
Feature Extractor
The feature extractor processes the input tensor. The input tensor has a shape of (Batch
Size, Number of Channels, 1200 Samples).
It consists of four sequential convolu­
tional blocks that are designed to hierarchically learn the temporal patterns of the data
with increasing complexity. All the blocks use a default stride of 1.
• Block 1: Has been developed to begin with a Conv1d layer using 32 filters and
a larger kernel size of 7. This allows the model to initially capture broader, low­
frequency patterns in the signal. This is followed by BatchNorm1d for stabilizing
training, a ReLU activation function to introduce non­linearity, and a MaxPool1d layer
which downsamples the sequence, making the learned features more robust to their
exact temporal location.
• Block 2 & 3: These next blocks uses a smaller kernel size of 5 and increase the
number of filters to first 64 and then 128. As the data goes deeper into the network,
the model learns to combine the simpcler patterns from earlier layers into more com­
plex and more abstract features. Again the use of MaxPool1d reduces the temporal
dimension further, focusing on the most important information captured.
• Block 4: This final convolutional block uses a small kernel size of 3 to capture very
fine­grained, high­frequency details.
• Adaptive Average Pooling:
After the final convolutional block, an AdaptiveAvg­
Pool1d layer is used. This is a very important step that takes the feature maps and
pools them into a fixed size vector of length 16. This creates a compact, summary
representation of all the features detected in the time series and ensures that the
input to the regressor is always the same size.
Regressor
The regressor takes the fixed­size feature vector from the extractor and maps it to the
final output predictions. In this implementation the regressor that consists of two fully
connected layers. In a CNN it is common to use fully connected layers after convolution
and polling layers to interpret the feature maps generated by the layers to final predic­
tions[59]. This acts as the final layer.
The regressor first flattens the 16 feature maps received from the Adaptive Average Pool­
ing. This creates a vector with a size of 128 ∗16 = 2048. The first fully connected layer
takes the vector and reduces it to a size of 128. ReLU activation function is ran and a
20% dropout is applied. From here the last fully connected layer is applied from 128 to
the 4 outputs of [Hs, Tp, sin(direction), cos(direction)].
6.3.3
Changes throughout development
A lot of different configurations of the model has been attempted to get better results.
Larger kernel size across the layers has been attempted for it to capture broader patterns,
but since each kernel slides across windows of 1200 samples you do not necessarily
require a large kernel to capture interesting elements. Increasing the size either had no
impact that was larger than the run to run variance or it would directly negatively impact the
results. During the development some training runs created wave direction that fluctuated
significantly and in some cases to an extreme of 180 degrees the wrong way. Changing
the model architecture did not seem to have much of an impact. Instead, changing the
data split to 80/10/10 instead showed an improvement. This gave a clear indication that
more training data could have a positive benefit. The datastore for the wave estimation got
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
41
==PAGE:50==
upgraded from 250 gb source data (before processing) to 800 gb and a total of 9 months
instead 2.5 months. This greatly stabilized the direction prediction for wave direction and
stopped the massive fluctuations that could be seen in some cases. This had a small
impact on improving Hs, and Tp.
6.4
Inference Pipeline
The primary motivation behind developing an inference pipeline is to create a practical
use that shows how the individual machine learning models can be used together and be
integrated into an existing workflow. This implementation serves as a proof of concept,
demonstrating how the models for sensor fault detection, wave estimation and operational
mode labelling can work together with the existing event­driven infrastructure used at
Rambøll.
The inference pipeline has been designed to be triggered automatically, processing sen­
sor data as it becomes available. The data is upload every hour by the offshore asset
owner. An existing infrastructure exists for numerical analysis, see Figure 6.5, and at­
taching the inference pipeline to wait for the existing GCP Pub/Sub event setup. This is
achieved by using an event­driven architecture, which is a common paradigm in modern
cloud applications[60]. The upload action automatically creates a publish message that is
sent to a Google Pub/Sub topic. An application can then subscribe to this topic, allowing
it to receive these messages and initiate the processing pipeline in near real­time without
the need for manually doing anything. The inference pipeline can attach to this Pub/Sub
topic to run automatically.
Figure 6.5: Infrastructure Diagram of Existing Infrastructure showing how a offshore plat­
form can upload data to the GCP Cloud Storage.
The inference process, as shown in the flowchart, see Figure 6.6, follow a sequence of
data validation and analysis steps, orchestrated by the main script of the implementation.
When the inference pipeline receives a trigger, either from a Pub/Sub message or a man­
ually selected folder path, then the pipeline execute the models based on the sensor data
that is available in the batch. The first step is to verify that the necessary sensor data
files exists in the batch. A single hourly batch normally contains four distinct ACQ files for
ACC, STR, LVDT and WAV data. This is used to see if the required files for the models
exists. After the needed files are present then sensor fault detection, wave estimation,
and operational mode labelling models can run.
42 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:51==
The pipeline transforms the raw incoming sensor data into the processed data the needs
models need. Each model have their own requirements for the data and each ACQ file
is processed with the correct decimation as part of a _preprocess flow each type of in­
ference needs. The implementation is intended as a blueprint that can be adapted and
integrated into Rambøll’s existing data handling solutions and dashboards, providing a
continuous, automated stream of valuable information to support their decision making.
Figure 6.6: Complete inference pipeline flowchart, showing how input triggers are pro­
cessed to locate sensor files, detect missing data, run sensor fault detection (SFD), per­
form wave estimation (WE) and operational mode labelling (OML), and ultimately generate
SFD, WE, and OML results.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
43
==PAGE:52==
44 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:53==
7
Results
This chapter will present the results of the machine learning models developed to address
the objectives of research outlined in Section 1.3. The focus is on the performance of the
fault detection system, then followed by the outcomes for the operational mode labeling
and wave characteristic estimation. A showcase of how the inference is displayed in the
inference pipeline is shown as the last section of this chapter. The results are presented
with further interpretation reserved for the Discussion chapter.
7.1
Sensor Fault Detection
To validate the sensor fault detection pipeline described in the Methodology, a 1D Convo­
lutional Autoencoder (AE) was trained for a sensor of each of the three sensor clusters:
accelerometers (ACC), strain gauges (STR), and displacement transducers (LVDT). The
performance of each model was evaluated on its ability to distinguish between healthy
and synthetically generated faulty sensor data. The key metric for evaluation is the recon­
struction error, where a significantly higher error indicates a probable anomaly or sensor
fault. A single sensor from each of the clusters was selected to show the results of the
autoencoder. The selection was done based on which sensor that were the most healthy
when the data was recorded in 2024. Most of the sensors from this dataset has broken
channels with significant sensor faults, an example can be seen in Appendix A, and they
were therefore discarded and not used.
7.1.1
Accelerometer
The model for the accelerometer cluster was trained and validated using data from the
ACC_3 sensor, which includes three channels: North (ACC_3_N), East (ACC_3_E), and
Vertical (ACC_3_V). Each of these channels can numerically represent acceleration in
both positive and negative to also allow recording the acceleration for south, west and
down.
The trained autoencoder’s ability to reconstruct healthy versus anomalous signals is
demonstrated in Figure 7.1. The top panel shows the model’s reconstruction of a healthy
signal, where the output closely matches the input, resulting in a low reconstruction error.
The bottom panel illustrates the model’s response to a signal with a simulated fault.
To test the model’s fault detection capability, I have ”corrupted” the signal by adding
random noise to one of the three sensor channels (North, East, or Vertical) at a time.
This simulated fault consists of Gaussian noise with an amount of 10% of the signal’s
standard deviation, allowing observation of the model’s response to anomalous data.
On Figure 7.2 the effects of the applied data ”corruption” can be seen on the frequency
domain. The corrupted input data shows a significant divergence between the input and
the reconstructed output, leading to a higher reconstruction error (RE). For this the RE
threshold was set to five standard deviations above the mean error (thr = µ + 5 × σ) of
the test reconstruction errors saved during training.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.1: Reconstruction of healthy (top) and faulty (bottom) signals for the ACC_3
sensor. The large reconstruction error in the bottom plot demonstrates the model’s ability
to detect anomalies.
Figure 7.2: Welch PSD for a healthy (top) and corrupted (bottom) signal. The bottom
panel shows the effect of adding 10% Gaussian noise to channel ACC_3_E, resulting in
clear spectral deviations around 14­16 Hz range and DC.
The threshold for fault detection was determined based on the distribution of reconstruc­
tion errors from the validation set, which contained only healthy data. The threshold here
was set at five standard deviations above the mean error (thr = µ + 5 × σ). As shown
in Figure 7.3, the reconstruction errors for healthy test data from two weeks after training
cutoff, fall consistently below this threshold when using newer data. On the unhealthy data
we see a high reconstruction error with one of the channels zeroed out. This happens be­
cause we’re zeroing a whole channel in time­domain, which makes its spectra near­zero
across all frequencies; after StandardScaler being fit on healthy data, we have our bins
46 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:55==
become a huge negative z­scores (often divided by very small stds), and the model re­
constructs “normal” non­zero spectra. The squared difference in scaled space, averaged
over hundreds of frequency bins, yields very large MSE (∼1200). This is significantly
worsened with more channels dropped. This shows that the model is able to efficiently
handle complete sensor failure efficiently. If we replace the dropout with a constant non­
zero value we also see a higher than threshold reconstruction error, see Appendix E.
Figure 7.3: Distribution of reconstruction errors for the ACC_3 model on test data showing
a clear separation between healthy signals and simulated sensor faults.
Benchmark Evaluation of Accelerometer Fault Detection Model
To further evaluate the results a test was performed on some test data composed for
this analysis, which included one data point from the model’s own training data and four
from future dates in the months after the end of the ground­truth data used for training.
To thoroughly evaluate the model’s ability to find faults the test set was augmented with
synthetic faults designed to look like a range of common, real­world sensor failure types.
This ensures that the model is measured against more than just random applied noise.
The model’s overall performance was quantified using standard classification metrics,
summarized in Table 7.1. The threshold here was again set to thr = µ + 5 × σ. The test
data used have a 75% overlap on the windows, five 1­hour files and a sample rate of 32
Hz. This gives 4485 windows and thus the benchmark gets 4485 healthy windows, and
13455 faulty windows (3 sets of healthy windows that has been corrupted) to work with.
The synthetic faults were designed to cover the following types of sensor errors:
• Precision Degradation: This fault, characterized by additional noise that obscures
the true signal, was simulated by injecting Gaussian noise into the data. The noise
had a standard deviation equal to 10% of the signal’s standard deviation, represent­
ing common issues like interference or electrical noise.
• Complete Failure: This critical fault represents a total loss of any meaningful output
whatsoever. It was simulated using channel dropout, where the data from one or
more randomly selected sensor channels was set entirely to zero. This effectively
models a ”flatline” failure caused by a catastrophic event like broken wires, direct
sensor damage, or a complete loss of power to the sensor.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
47
==PAGE:56==
• Outliers: To simulate more isolated errors high­amplitude spikes were randomly
introduced into the signal. These spikes represent events like sudden environmen­
tal variations, loose electrical contacts, or electromagnetic interference, where the
sensor output briefly deviates before returning to normal. Very severe spikes, with a
magnitude of 500% of the signal’s standard deviation, are applied to 1 to 3 random
time points on a random channel.
The confusion matrix on Figure 7.4 shows that the fault detection system achieves strong
separation between the healthy and faulty windows on this dataset. The diagonal cells
that represents the correct predictions (true negatives and true positives) dominates over
the off­diagonal entries. In particular, no false positives are observed, which is consistent
with the perfect precision of 1.00 as reported in Table 7.1. Precision measures how many
of the predictions flagged as faulty were actually faulty. The small number of false nega­
tives (true faults that the model missed) explains the small drop in recall to 0.9473, which
measures the model’s ability to identify all actual positive cases. This performance yields
an overall F1­score of 0.9729, a metric that provides a balanced measure as the harmonic
mean of precision and recall, and an accuracy of 0.9605, representing the proportion of
all correct classifications. In practice, this means the model almost never flags healthy
data as faulty and only rarely misses a true fault for this accelerometer the data has been
trained on.
These outcomes generally looks to align with the reconstruction error (RE) behavior of the
CNN Autoencoder, shown in Figure 7.1 and 7.3. The model was only trained to recon­
struct healthy data, so healthy windows cluster well below the decision threshold derived
from the healthy data, while synthetically faulty windows show way larger RE. This clear
difference in the RE distributions underlines the diagonal dominance in the confusion ma­
trix (see Figure 7.4) and the high scores in Table 7.1. Notably, fault types such as channel
dropouts produce near­zero spectra that, after standardization, yield very large deviations
from the learned patterns of normal operation, thus driving RE far above the threshold and
ensuring robust detection.
Table 7.1: Fault detection performance for the Accelerometer (ACC_3) model.
Data Type
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­Score
Test Set
0.9605
1.00
0.9473
0.9729
Figure 7.4: Confusion matrix of the ACC model’s performance on the test set. The high
concentration of values on the diagonal (True Negatives and True Positives) indicates a
high degree of accuracy.
48 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:57==
7.1.2
Strain Gauge
The same 1D CNN Autoencoder architecture and training procedure described in Sec­
tion 7.1.1 were applied to the strain gauge data. Specifically, the STR_3 sensor using the
RAW A, B, C, and D channels was used to train this model. As with the accelerometer, the
reconstruction error was used as the fault indicator, with a threshold set to thr = µ+5×σ
from the healthy validation distribution.
Figure 7.5 shows the model’s ability in distinguishing between normal and anomalous
data. As with Figure 7.1, the top displays the reconstruction of a healthy signal, showing
a very close match between the input and the model’s output, which results in a low
reconstruction error, and most importantly within the confines of the threshold. To evaluate
the model’s fault detection ability, a synthetic fault was introduced by adding Gaussian
noise, equivalent to 10% of the signal’s standard deviation, to one of the sensor channels,
same fault as shown with the ACC evaluation above. The bottom panel of Figure 7.5
shows the model’s response to this synthetically generated faulty data.
Figure 7.5:
Reconstruction of healthy (top) and faulty (bottom) signals for the
RAW_STR_3 sensor. The large reconstruction error in the bottom plot demonstrates the
model’s ability to detect anomalies.
Benchmark Evaluation of Strain Gauge Fault Detection Model
This clear separation in reconstruction error between healthy and faulty data is the foun­
dation of the model’s strong performance, as quantified in Table 7.2. The model achieves
an accuracy of 0.9860, with a perfect precision of 1.0, a recall of 0.9813, and an F1­Score of
0.9905. The perfect precision indicates that the model did not produce any false positives,
meaning no healthy data was incorrectly flagged as faulty. This aligns with the com­
parison diagram in Figure 7.5, where the reconstruction error for healthy data remains
consistently low. The same testing methodology with the same test files as used for the
accelerometer evaluation was used for the strain gauge model evaluation. A confusion
matrix can be seen on Figure 7.6.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
49
==PAGE:58==
Table 7.2: Fault detection performance for the Strain Gauge (RAW_STR_3) model.
Data Type
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­Score
Test Set
0.9860
1.00
0.9813
0.9905
Figure 7.6: Confusion matrix of the STR model’s performance on the test set. The high
concentration of values on the diagonal (True Negatives and True Positives) indicates a
high degree of accuracy.
7.1.3
Displacement Transducer
The same 1D CNN Autoencoder architecture was applied to the Displacement Trans­
ducer (LVDT) sensor data. However, the performance on this sensor cluster was signif­
icantly worse compared to the accelerometers and strain gauges, as can be seen from
the benchmark results in Table 7.3 and visualized in the confusion matrix in Figure 7.7.
The model managed to get an accuracy of 0.5394 and a lower recall of 0.3894. This low
recall indicates that the model failed to identify a large portion of the actual faults, as
can be seen by the high number of false negatives in Figure 7.7. This outcome is not
unexpected and highlights a large fundamental limitation of using this type of machine
learning model to this specific kind of data. The LVDT sensors are characterized by long
periods where the signal is nearly stationary or moves in a very predictable pattern, and
the two sensors are also very highly correlated (see Appendix G), as they measure same
bridge from parallel positions.
The autoencoder is great at learning efficient representations of data by identifying and
exploiting redundancies[40]. In the case of the LVDT sensors, the model learns that the
two channels are basically redundant copies of each other. When a synthetic fault (like a
dropout or noise) is introduced on a channel, the autoencoder leveraz ges the clean signal
to recreate the corrupted one. This effectively ”corrects” the fault during the reconstruction
process, resulting in a low reconstruction error that fails to cross the anomaly detection
threshold. This makes it difficult for the model to find genuine faults from normal behavior.
While 1D CNNs are great at learning local patterns, they are less effective when the input
channels are highly correlated or contain hardly any unique variability. In such a case,
the network simply doesn’t have enough distinct structure from it can learn meaningful
filters[61].
Interestingly, while the recall is poor in the benchmark, the precision is 0.9911. This means
that although the model misses many faults, every fault it is able to identify is a real and
50 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:59==
genuine fault. This very high precision suggests that the model is still capable of de­
tecting certain anomalies that affect the data in a way it cannot correct through channel
to channel correlation. The high precision is achieved by ensuring a good balance be­
tween the threshold and what the healthy and unhealthy windows produces in terms of
reconstruction error. The threshold was for the LVDT set to (thr = µ + 2 × σ).
From these results it is obvious that using a machine learning­based approach may not be
the most reliable solution for the LVDT sensors. While another machine­learning approach
besides a 1D CNN autoencoder might work better, it is important to recognize that a
simple sensor like the LVDT ­ with well­defined use and properties ­ may be better served
by continuing to use Rambøll’s existing numerical or statistical methods. Perhaps, it is
even worth upgrading it with better rule­based checks for conditions like flat­lining or out­
of­range values. This would likely be a more effective solution for detecting the most
common and critical faults in this type of data.
It is worth mentioning that the perfect precision of the autoencoder model opens a door for
a hybrid approach. Where first simple rule­based statistical checks are performed, and
then with any data that passes the initial checks could be then inserted into the autoen­
coder model. In this setup, the model would be a secondary, more advanced detector,
tasked with identifying more complex anomalies that the rule­based system might miss.
Even with the apparent issues of the LVDT Fault Model it is still able to find some issues
and this hybrid system could be used to more novel issues that would otherwise have
been missed by the rule­based system.
Table 7.3: Fault detection performance for the Displacement Transducer (DIS_1_) model.
Data Type
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­Score
Test Set
0.5394
0.9911
0.3894
0.5590
Figure 7.7: Confusion matrix of the LVDT model’s performance on the test set. The model
performs generally poorly. This is expected when working with singular data channels or
highly correlated channels
It is important to note that a configuration with a single channel was also attempted during
the development phase. However, the performance was just as poor. The multi­channel
approach using both of the LVDT sensors was used to investigate if learning the cor­
relation between the sensors would provide a better fault indicator. Ultimately, this just
resulted in a model that masked the faults via redudancy.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
51
==PAGE:60==
7.2
Operational Mode Labelling (OML)
The OML results are promising. As shown on Figure 7.8, the HDBSCAN creates a signif­
icant number of clusters. Recall that HDBSCAN selects k number of clusters on its own.
These clusters were found on a min_sample = 6 and min_cluster_size = 6. Enforcing
a low min_sample = 6 and min_cluster_size = 6 results in a larger amount of clusters,
but it is essential to keep these parameters low to avoid missing interesting amplitude
fluctuations and frequency shifts that is not part of the dominant state.
Figure 7.8: Cluster labels from HDBSCAN over time (window start times) for February­
April 2020. ­1 marks noise/outliers. The plot shows 37 clusters and noise (47.57%).
This approach of using the spectral features directly is different from traditional SHM tech­
niques, which often rely on tracking changes in a structure’s modal parameters, such as
its natural frequencies, damping ratios, and mode shapes[6]. While these approaches
are powerful for OMA it is not very good for structures that are very stiff, such as the off­
shore platform used in this thesis, as patterns that can be derived tends to be insensitive
to smaller events. Significant structural damage or a major shift in operational load would
be required to produce a measurable change in these global mode shapes. This makes
them less effective for identifying the subtle, temporary shifts in operational behavior that
are of particular interest here.
Instead of tracking these somewhat potentially misleading mode shapes, the method used
here focuses on the PSD. This allows for the detection of vibrational loads that might not
affect a global mode shape but still represent a distinct operational state. The goal of
performing HDBSCAN for OML was to detect significant changes in the selected PSD
bands. A downside of HDBSCAN is the need for a sufficient number of similar events
to generate a cluster. This means that shorter lived fluctuations in the PSD bands are
not always captured. Most of the events that contribute to changes in amplitude along
the frequency bands of the PSD are a result of environmental conditions affecting the
52 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:61==
structure. These are often captured in the dominant state or as noise (−1), either because
the PSD feature points are similar to the dominant state or because they represent a new,
unseen point where not enough similar points exist to form a new cluster. This also results
in situations where, unfortunately, legitimate one­time events cannot be captured as a
distinct cluster.
On Figure 7.9 a visual representation of how these clusters are separated in a lower
dimensional space can be seen. The PCA projection maps the higher dimensional PSD
features into a two dimensional space, with each point colored according to its assigned
cluster label. This plot shows a large, dense region of points (in yellow, this is cluster
36) that represents the most common or dominant operational state of the structure. In
contrast, other clusters appear as smaller, more scattered groups, indicating short lived
or less frequent operational modes.
Figure 7.9: PCA projection of the PSD features, colored by HDBSCAN cluster label. The
large and dense area in yellow represents the dominant operational mode (cluster 36),
while other colors correspond to more transient or distinct operational states. The sepa­
ration between groups shows the features in different modes.
A good example of a short lived operational mode that is only seen once in the dataset
used is shown on Figure 7.10. On 27th of March, 2020 a specific one hour window showed
an increase in energy at approximately 0.9 Hz and its harmonic at 1.8 Hz. This event, when
processed, results in a unique spectral signature that allows HDBSCAN to assign it to a
specific cluster, separating it from the more typical behavior observed just 24 hours earlier.
This demonstrates the system’s ability to automatically flag and group periods of unusual
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
53
==PAGE:62==
structural behavior based on their frequency­domain characteristics. Its ability to find this
event is seen as a great success as the 0.9 Hz spectra fluctuation, internally known as a
”shivering” event, is an event that the company wanted to see if it was possible to detect,
and has special interest for them.
Figure 7.10: Time­series and power spectral density (PSD) of ACC_5_N for a one­hour
window from 05:00­06:00 on 27­03­2020 compared with a later one­hour segment from
24h earlier. The primary PSD shows distinct peaks near 0,9 Hz and its harmonic at ∼1,8
Hz, along with noticeably sharper attenuation around ∼0,85 Hz and ∼1,75 Hz when com­
pared to the same sensor a 24 hours earlier. These spectral differences highlight a tran­
sient increase in energy at the fundamental and harmonic frequencies during the earlier
interval. The PSD has a log scale applied for better readability.
A finding from Figure 7.8 is that a large portion of the data (47,57%) is classified as noise
(label −1). This should not be read as a failure of the model, but rather an insight into the
data itself. It shows that much of the structure’s behavior consists of either a dominant,
steady state or highly variable, short­lived events that do not repeat with enough times
or with enough similarity to form a dense cluster under the current parameter settings.
Changing the parameter settings will allow more noise to be classified as a non­noise
label, but this has the negative side effect of killing many of the existing labels found or
creating a large amount of meaningless labels. Finding a middle that allows interpre­
tation of valuable results is the most important factor here. The choice of window size
for calculating the PSD is one such critical parameter that involves a trade­off. A larger
window would provide a smoother, more stable spectrum, potentially merging the distinct
short­lived events into a more generalized state. On the other hand, a smaller window,
while way better at capturing rapid, short­lived changes, might introduce more variance
and result in a higher percentage of points being classified as noise. The current window
size was chosen to balance the detection of meaningful short­lived events without being
overly sensitive to minor, random fluctuations. This is why the results ended up using 60
second windows as it was a good small window without losing too much information about
the general patterns and without containing too many fluctuations due to being too small.
54 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:63==
7.3
Wave Estimation Model
The wave estimation model was developed to infer important sea­state parameters ­ sig­
nificant wave height (Hs), peak wave period (Ts), and wave direction ­ directly from the
platform’s accelerometer data. The performance of the developed model was evaluated
using a test set. These results from this test set can be seen summarized along the train­
ing run logs on Figure 7.11. The training was done with early stopping, which concluded
at epoch 31 (patience set at 15) with epoch 16 identified as the most optimal, based on its
validation loss of 0.3108. On the final test set, the model got a MAE of 0.1532 m for Hs,
1.1049 s for Tp, and 18.85° for wave direction. This result is the best result received across
a large amount of training runs tuning parameters many times. The model was trained
on data from a Parquet datastores that held data from 01­01­2020 00:00 to 30­09­2020
23:59. All the results is using data for inference from after this period.
1
Training Started 2025-11-05 21:22:06,881
2
Epoch 1
- train=0.5092, val=0.4610*,
RMSE Hs=0.2036, Tp=1.7864, Dir MAE=33.37°
3
Epoch 2
- train=0.3276, val=0.4089*,
RMSE Hs=0.1752, Tp=1.5902, Dir MAE=33.96°
4
Epoch 3
- train=0.2865, val=0.5186,
RMSE Hs=0.3120, Tp=1.5315, Dir MAE=39.35°
5
Epoch 4
- train=0.2613, val=0.6869,
RMSE Hs=0.1583, Tp=1.5663, Dir MAE=46.69°
6
Epoch 5
- train=0.2478, val=0.4581,
RMSE Hs=0.1680, Tp=1.4626, Dir MAE=29.63°
7
Epoch 6
- train=0.2408, val=0.4574,
RMSE Hs=0.1701, Tp=1.4594, Dir MAE=30.85°
8
Epoch 7
- train=0.2255, val=0.4470,
RMSE Hs=0.2530, Tp=1.4534, Dir MAE=28.29°
9
Epoch 8
- train=0.2182, val=0.4147,
RMSE Hs=0.2551, Tp=1.4844, Dir MAE=29.36°
10
Epoch 9
- train=0.1997, val=0.3244*,
RMSE Hs=0.1594, Tp=1.4118, Dir MAE=23.40°
11
Epoch 10 - train=0.1930, val=0.3612,
RMSE Hs=0.1692, Tp=1.4025, Dir MAE=27.15°
12
Epoch 11 - train=0.1864, val=0.3974,
RMSE Hs=0.1663, Tp=1.3988, Dir MAE=29.68°
13
Epoch 12 - train=0.1878, val=0.3553,
RMSE Hs=0.1723, Tp=1.3725, Dir MAE=28.80°
14
Epoch 13 - train=0.1821, val=0.3469,
RMSE Hs=0.1826, Tp=1.3973, Dir MAE=26.59°
15
Epoch 14 - train=0.1792, val=0.3422,
RMSE Hs=0.1792, Tp=1.3917, Dir MAE=26.59°
16
Epoch 15 - train=0.1801, val=0.3563,
RMSE Hs=0.1560, Tp=1.3949, Dir MAE=28.06°
17
Epoch 16 - train=0.1667, val=0.3108*,
RMSE Hs=0.1751, Tp=1.4002, Dir MAE=24.95°
18
...
19
Early stopping at Epoch 31 (best epoch: 16, best val: 0.3108)
20
Training Done 2025-11-05 21:30:22,164
21
22
Test set:
23
Test MSE=0.2075, MAE Hs=0.1532, RMSE Hs=0.2014, MAE Tp=1.1049, RMSE Tp=1.5471,
24
Dir MAE=18.85°, Dir RMSE=31.05°
Figure 7.11: Training, validation, and test metrics across epochs with early stopping (best
epoch 16).
7.3.1
Significant Wave Height (Hs) Results
Using data between October 17, 2020 and October 19, 2020 for an inference test the
model can be seen demonstrating a strong ability in predicting the significant wave height,
as can be seen on Figure 7.12. The Figure shows a time­series comparison between the
predicted and actual Hs values over the 3 days and shows them agreeing on the trends.
The model tracks the fluctuations in wave height, and is able to capture both the calmer
sea states and when there is more pronounced sea swells. The results from this inference
test gave scores of MAE : 0.180m, RMSE : 0.232m for Hs prediction. This level of
accuracy shows that the model has successfully learned the relationship between the
structure’s vibrational response and the energy of the sea around the offshore structure.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
55
==PAGE:64==
The high accuracy in the prediction of Hs makes sense from a physical perspective. Hs
size has an direct impact of the measured acceleration, as with bigger waves comes more
energy applied to the structures. This makes it a relatively direct mapping problem for the
CNN to learn, and is able to act as a ”model­based sensor” that allows detection for Hs if
the wave radar should fail or be discontinued.
Figure 7.12: Time­series plot comparing predicted and observed significant wave height
(Hs) from Oct 17, 2020 to Oct 19, 2020, showing strong agreement between model pre­
dictions and actual measurements across calmer conditions and periods of higher sea
swell
7.3.2
Peak Wave Period (Tp) Results
The model’s predictions for the peak wave period also aligned well with the measured
data, as can be seen in Figure 7.13. The plot indicates that the model can effectively esti­
mate the peak wave period. The test performance resulted in an MAE : 0.734s, RMSE :
1.005s for the Tp prediction.
The higher prediction error for Tp compared to Hs does not indicate that there is anything
wrong with the model. The physical relationship between the input data and Tp is just
more complex. The offshore structure accelerometers records acceleration from many
different things. The model must learn to map the accelerations to Tp based on waves
and not other sources. The fluctuations we see for the actual Tp when the value is higher
is most likely due to the fact that the Tp for this data set is calculated for 5 minutes. This is
short for Tp where most often it is seen in 1 hour calculations. Even with these challenge,
the model’s ability to provide a good estimate Tp is very valuable as with the Hs allows to
give a prediction that follows incredibly closely to what the wave radar would give without
the need for the wave radar anymore.
Figure 7.13: Time­series plot comparing predicted (blue) and actual (orange ­ overlaying
the blue in many areas) peak wave period (Tp) from Oct 17, 2020 to Oct 19, 2020, showing
close agreement between model estimates and measurements during both lower and
higher sea­state conditions
56 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:65==
7.3.3
Wave Direction Results
Predicting wave direction from the accelerometer data is the most complex problem of
the estimation tasks, and the issue that has taken the most time by far, as it requires the
model to learn the subtle structural responses caused by directional structural loading
and the fact that the wave direction data source is 15 kilometers away from the offshore
structure. Despite this rather problematic challenge, the model achieved a promising level
of performance on a test set created from Nov 3 to Nov 5. This resulted in an MAE of
14.28° and a RMSE of 21.07°.
The problem with the data source, the buoy, being 15 kilometers away is all larger physical
events are delayed between them. Wind, sea state, and so on has to start somewhere and
it can take some time for the gap to be closed. This means that on top of the directional
challenges the model also have to take into account the issue of not being able to map
directional loading directly to a wave direction without also taking the potential gap in time
into consideration. On Figure 7.14 the difference between Hs and Tp for the offshore
structure and buoy can be seen for the 9 months where the training data is from. Looking
at Hs specifically it is quite obvious that the wave state is generally very close to be the
same between the two locations, meaning the sea state applying directional loading on
the offshore structure is roughly on the buoy. However, there are still differences to take
into consideration especially Tp being very different from time to time, and the fact it is
hard to tell much about the wave direction based solely on Hs and Tp.
Figure 7.14: Tp and Hs from Offshore Structure and Buoy relatively. Retrieved from Ram­
bøll’s InfluxDB of processed offshore measurements. Bottom two is the Hs and the top
two is the Tp. From this we can see that there is generally a close Hs between respec­
tively the Offshore Structure (Purple) and the Buoy (Blue), but Tp has a significantly larger
difference between the Offshore Structure (Orange) and Buoy (Violet) in some areas.
The wave estimation model’s ability to capture the general trend of the wave direction over
time can be seen on Figure 7.15. The time­series plot shows that the predicted direction
(blue points) successfully follows the large­scale shifts of the actual observed direction
(orange curve). The data for the wave direction inference is taken from Nov 3, 2020 to
Nov 5, 2020 due to the October data used previously being very dominant towards north
showing next to no interesting movement in direction. This data range was also chosen
due to it being an example of higher prediction error and a period of stable prediction. The
model on the figure shows generally a higher variability in predictions versus actual values,
but generally follows the trend of the actual data well. The inferred data across multiple
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
57
==PAGE:66==
tests all show the predicted direction on average to be within Rambøll’s requirements of
±45°. A few of the singular higher prediction errors is above ±45°.
Figure 7.15: Time series of wave direction from Nov 3, 2020 to Nov 5, 2020, where blue
points represent predicted wave direction and the orange curve shows the actual observed
direction. The highest deviation is 45°
This is also evident from Figure 7.16 that shows directional distribution plots. The polat
plots compare the distribution of the predicted directions versus the actual observations
for the entire test set. Both plots show a clear and consistent wave direction dominantly
towards the West (W) and West­North­West (WNW). The actual direction also have quite
a number going towards South West (SW). The predicted values for the SW direction
(230°−240°) is on average within the tolerance. Overall there are minor differences in the
distributions, but the overall agreement is very strong considering the requirements and
physical challenges, and it confirms that the model is able to capture the wave approach
angles very well.
Figure 7.16: Distribution of wave direction: the left polar plot shows predicted wave di­
rections (blue), and the right plot shows actual observed directions (orange), highlighting
similar dominant directions toward the west and southwest.
7.3.4
Comparison with LSTM and Transformer
To ensure the validity of the chosen 1D CNN architecture approach, an analysis to com­
pare against two other deep learning architectures that are widely used for time­series
models was performed. The two models are a Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM)[62]
58 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:67==
network and a Transformer­based model[63]. All models were trained using the same
dataset, split, and preprocessing to ensure a fair evaluation between the architectures.
The LSTM has been developed to use a bidirectional architecture[64] with 4 layers and
a hidden size set to 128. It has been designed to capture long­term dependencies in
the sequential accelerometer data to especially attempt to find a better result between
the structural loading and the wave direction measured 15 kilometers away. The Trans­
former model used a standard encoder architecture with 4 layers, 8 attention heads, and
sinusoidal positional encodings. The intention is to use the self­attention mechanisms to
identify more complex global dependencies in the signal.
The results of this comparison can be found in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Performance comparison of Wave Estimation architectures on the test set split.
Model
Test MSE
MAE Hs (m)
MAE Tp (s)
MAE Dir (°)
1D CNN (Proposed)
0.2075
0.1532
1.1049
18.85
Bi­LSTM
0.1777
0.1725
1.0507
16.15
Transformer
0.5066
0.2590
1.5128
41.10
Analysis of Transformer Performance
The performance of the transformer model is not super convincing. It performed signifi­
cantly worse than both the CNN and LSTM architectures across all the metrics. With a
MAE for wave direction of 41.10° it essentially fails to capture the directional trends within
the tolerance, and with a high error in Hs, the model basically failed to converge on a
useful generalization.
The poor performance of the transformer model is likely due to the size of the dataset.
Transformers needs a significant amount of data and even with 82, 116 windows of data,
it is not enough. For the available nine month dataset, the Transformer architecture has
therefore proven to be overly complex and data­hungry, resulting in the inability to optimize
the attention weights meaningfully for this specific physical task. Increasing the number
of samples would likely make the transformer perform better.
Analysis of LSTM Performance
The bidirectional LSTM has proven to be a very competitive architecture relative to the
CNN. The LSTM achieved a slightly better overall Test MSE and performed marginally
better in wave direction and Tp compared to the CNN. This aligns with the theoretical
strengths of the LSTM in handling temporal dependencies in sequential data.
However, the 1D CNN was in the end selected as the final model for two reasons:
1. Accuracy in Important Metrics: The CNN did better than the LSTM in estimating
Hs, achieving an MAE of 1.532m compared to 1.725 from the LSTM. Hs is an im­
portant metric that is a critical parameter for assessing the structural load based on
wave heights. Wave direction, while better on average on the LSTM (see Appendix
I) the largest errors is higher than the CNN. This means the tolerance of ±45 tends
to be broken in a more severe manner and with less room for uncertain prediction.
2. Computational Efficiency: The LSTM process data sequentially, which means
that it cannot be parallelized during training and inference[65]. The 1D CNN, how­
ever, can be and allows for massive parallelization as each convolutional kernel
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
59
==PAGE:68==
slides independently over the sequence.
During the experimentation, the CNN
trained significantly faster and the final model took 8 minutes to train (see Figure
7.11, while the LSTM took 1 hour and 39 minutes (see Appendix H). This pattern is
the same for inference for the same reasons. Given the objective is to ultimately let
the company use this and deploy it in a pipeline for GCP that is most likely going
to be in a resource­constrained managed solution or edge environment, the CNN
efficiency outweighs the marginal (and in case of Hs, negative) performance gains
of the LSTM. Diagrams for further evaluation can be found in Appendix I for LSTM
evaluation.
Ultimately, the 1D CNN offers the optimal balance between prediction accuracy for the
parameters and the computational efficiency required for future training and inference.
60 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:69==
7.4
Inference Pipeline
The developed inference pipeline is a successful proof­of­concept, demonstrating the au­
tomated, sequential processing of sensor data through the developed machine learning
models for sensor fautl detection, operational mode labelling, and wave estimation. The
pipeline’s main functionality was validated using the --folder argument that allows man­
ual processing of a data batch stored locally.
An example of the pipeline’s output from a manual run on a data batch from June 7,
2024, is shown in Appendix J. This output shows the sequential execution of the mod­
els. First, the Sensor Fault Detection module processes the accelerometer and strain
gauge data, reporting that for this specific hour, no faulty windows were detected out of
the 897 windows analyzed for each sensor. Next, the Wave Estimation model is run on
the accelerometer data, generating a table of sea state parameters ­ significant wave
height (Hs), peak wave period (Tp), and wave direction (Dir_deg) ­ for each five­minute
interval of the hour. Finally, the operational mode labelling model processes the same
accelerometer data, identifying and estimating the distribution of operational states. In
this case, it classified the majority of the period (80.7%) as the dominant ’Noise’ state,
with the remaining time distributed between two other distinct operational clusters.
This output shows that the pipeline is able to integrate all three model types into a cohesive
workflow. It transforms raw sensor .acq files into a set of analytical results Rambøll can
use.
Unfortunately, due to access restrictions to Rambøll’s cloud environment, the event­driven
functionality using the Google Cloud Pub/Sub could not be tested, but the pipeline’s archi­
tecture is designed to integrate seamlessly with their existing infrastructure. The underly­
ing processing logic, which was validated with the local folder testing shown in Appendix
J, is the same as what would be triggered by a Pub/Sub event. The pipeline has therefore
proven its ability to perform an end­to­end inference process and is a solid foundation for
future integration into a real­time, automated monitoring system at Rambøll.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
61
==PAGE:70==
62 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:71==
8
Discussion
8.1
Model Drift, Structural and Environmental Changes
Model drift is a problem that will require attention over time. The offshore structure’s prop­
erties are not stationary and will change over time. This particular platform is an aging
asset that has received a lifetime extension. As part of normal wear and tear, mainte­
nance, retrofitting, and component replacement the offshore structure undergoes this will
over time pose a serious risk of model drift, where the statistical properties of the data
used as input will change. This means that the data used with the models can change in
such a way that the sensor fault detection model detects healthy data as unhealthy, the
wave estimation model makes weird predictions, or the operational mode labelling fitting
the data to noise as no cluster makes sense anymore.
Environmental changes due to global warming can also be a contributing factor or cause
for model drift. The waves characteristics can change causing different wave patterns
than previously seen before [28]. These changes can also affect the models negatively if
the sea swell is lower or higher than previously recorded.
To handle this efficiently a sort of model life cycle should definitely be implemented where
a human assesses the model’s performance periodically. If the model is showing a signif­
icant drift, the ground­truth data can be extended to include the new conditions for which
the model can be retrained on. While this can be tedious and costly it is important that
the models are taken care of as they are used in relation to critical infrastructure.
8.2
Sensor Fault Reconstruction Error Threshold
The performance of the Sensor Fault Detection model is directly linked to the selection
of the reconstruction error threshold. In this thesis, the threshold was set to five standard
deviations above the mean of the validation set error. This choice was made based on
trial and error to find a threshold that minimized false positives as much as possible. The
threshold selected is sufficient for the current testing conditions, but with gradual structural
changes causing possible model drift over time it is worth noting that threshold should be
updated to conform to the requirements of the actual conditions of the offshore structure.
Eventually with too many structural changes the model cannot be saved as the errors will
either be too large, or the line between fault and healthy will be too blurred.
8.3
Noise: Friend or Foe?
Throughout the implementation of the three research objectives, the handling of signal
noise has played in a bit of a contradictory role. The question of wether the noise should
be seen as a foe and eliminated or a friend to be utilized has been a continuous question
throughout, depending on the specific application.
For the Sensor Fault Detection, noise was treated as an important feature rather than an
artifact to be rid of. Here, the rFFT was selected over Welch’s method. While Welch’s
method averages out noise to produce a smooth PSD, this process of smoothing can kill
the ”texture” of a sensor fault. For example, precision degradation or electrical interfer­
ence often shows as a raised noise level or specific high­frequency jaggedness[3]. By
using rFFT, these noisy spectral details are preserved. The autoencoder, trained to re­
construct the clean patterns of a healthy signal, is able to use this noise as a broader
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
63
==PAGE:72==
perspective on what a healthy noise signature would look like. If the Welch’s method
would have been used this noise signature would be killed, and the autoencoder might let
otherwise unhealthy signals pass as signals due to Welch’s method destroying the noise
signature. In this context, noise is a ”friend” ­ or at least a critical indicator ­ that must be
preserved
On the other hand, for Operational Mode Labelling, noise acts partly as a ”foe”. The
objective here is to identify the dominant structural state of the platform and the transient
events that linger long enough to be of notice. Using rFFT would result in a feature space
that would drown in noise and would likely never achieve a state that is steady for long
enough, causing the HDBSCAN algorithm to find clusters based on random noise rather
than physical operational modes. Therefore, Welch’s method was strictly necessary to
average out the stochastic content and stabilize the spectral features, thus allowing the
clustering algorithm to focus on the structural responses. On the other hand, diminishing
the noise too much had the impact of either forcing way too many states into the dominant
state or allowing the noise label to become too large whilst killing the majority of the distinct
labels. This effect was observed when a robust scaler or a logarithmic transformation was
applied to the features. While these are not inherently noise reduction features they had
the side effect of compressing the dynamic range of the signal so strongly that meaningful
transient signatures were flattened along with the noise, effectively eroding the contrast
between true operational modes.
In the Wave Estimation model, the ”noise” contained the signal itself. The stochastic
nature of the sea surface elevation, characterized by the waves and impacts is the physical
characteristic being measured. The 1D CNN was trained on the raw time­domain signal
because it needed to extract features from these noisy fluctuations. The CNN proved that
what can appear as random noise in a time­series plot does contain complex, and most
importantly, learnable patterns that correlate directly with the sea states. Therefore, the
definition of noise in offshore SHM is not an absolute that should be rid of. It is a feature
for fault detection, a distraction for operational labelling, and the primary signal used for
wave estimation.
8.4
The Meaning of ”Noise” in Operational Mode Labelling
The use of HDBSCAN for Operational Mode Labelling (OML) resulted in about 47.57% of
the data being clustered as ”Noise” (label ­1). In traditional clustering related work, such
a high noise percentage might be seen as a failure. However, in the domain of offshore
structural dynamics, this ”noise” cluster is due to the very stochastic environment where
a steady state is often interrupted. This means that the ”noise” label is more an indication
of transitional states or short­lived events. For example, ramp up time for production, or a
short run with the crane that might not persist long enough to satisfy the density require­
ments. Therefore, the ”noise” label should be seen as a ”Non­Steady State” instead of
just noise. For Rambøll, the ratio of Noise­to­Clustered data itself becomes somewhat of
a health metric. A sudden increase in the percentage of ”noise” could imply the structure
has entered a period of high instability or is showing behavior that is different from its
established operational norms.
8.4.1
”Shivering” Events and the Role of Unsupervised Learning
The detection of ”shivering” events is an example of qualitative validation of the OML ap­
proach. With the absence of operational logs it makes it difficult to do qualitative validation
of the cluster labels. The model’s ability to isolate this specific event using HDBSCAN
and PSD features is a significant result. As previously established, the ”shivering” event
64 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:73==
is characterized by a distinct energy signature in the 0.9 Hz frequency band, and can be
identified by domain experts. This finding shows the primary advantage of using an un­
supervised approach. It enables the detection of distinct operational states without the
need for doing prior labelling work. Unlike supervised models, which are limited to only
recognize whatever they have been trained to recognize, this methodology provides a
framework for discovering unknowns that might have otherwise been missed.
8.5
Distance Issue in Wave Estimation for Wave Direction
One major challenge in the Wave Estimation model is the 15 km distance between the
offshore platform and the reference buoy that provides the wave direction data. Waves
traveling 15 km introduce a physical time lag meaning the data from buoy will not be per­
fectly aligned with the specific wave front that is interacting with the offshore structure.
The recorded structural loading can therefore show a very different picture of reality rela­
tive to the target wave direction we are trying to estimate. The local winds can also differ
between the two locations. This means that the model is being penalized for predictions
that could very well be legitimate differences in local conditions. If there was more con­
sistent sea swell it would most likely have less of an impact, but the physical conditions
of the waves change a lot over the data period. That being said the model is still able to
predict within ±45° in by far most of the cases with some heavy outliers being outside.
Taking into account the physical constraints of wave direction and with the results of Hs
and Tp the Wave Estimation is seen as a massive success, and is a first of its kind for the
department at the company.
8.6
Comparison of Findings with Existing Literature
This thesis has addressed challenges that have been the subject of extensive research
in the SHM community. Comparing the results achieved here with the methods reviewed
in Chapter 2 shows the performance of the proposed models.
8.6.1
Sensor Fault Detection: Non­Linearity vs Statistical Approaches
The existing literature, as reviewed in Section 2.2, uses methods like multivariate statiscal
techniques such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA)[14, 15], and Minimum Mean
Square Error for sensor fault detection[4]. Deep learning has also been utilized for sensor
fault detection using ANNs to achieve convincing fault detection results[3].
The 1D CNN Autoencoder developed in this thesis offers an advantage over the traditional
linear methods with its non­linearity and feature extraction. While PCA relies on global
linear correlations, the autoencoder, by using ReLU activation functions and convolutional
kernels, is able to capture complex, non­linear local patterns within the frequency spec­
trum. This is particularly interesting for accelerometer data (Section 7.1.1), where the
model was able to successfully learned the patterns of the noise and the shape of the
resonant peaks. As established, noise in the data for sensor fault detection is not nec­
essarily a negative aspect. PCA can reduce this noise if the true signal dominates the
variance and the noise is scattered across the many dimensions during noise reduction.
During testing the autoencoder is able to deal with relatively small amount of noise and
find the error, which might not be be possible for a PCA approach.
However, the limitations seen with the displacement transducers (LVDT) in Section 7.1.3
shows a scenario where the traditional methods of using PCA or rule based statistical
checks might be better. The Autoencoder failed to flag faults because it learned the high
correlation between redundant channels to reconstruct the signal, hiding the anomaly.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
65
==PAGE:74==
This suggests that while deep learning approaches can be exceptional options for fault
detection, traditional and straight forwards methods can still be useful when the deep
learning methods fail.
8.6.2
Wave Estimation: Is Attention All You Need?
For inferring sea states from structural motion, existing literature has used Attention­based
Neural Networks (Transformers). Selimović et al. [21] demonstrated that self­attention
mechanisms significantly outperformed CNNs and LSTMs in estimating wave parameters
from ship motion, reducing error rates by up to 83%.
Opposed to those findings, the results of this thesis (Section 7.3) show that the Trans­
former architecture failed to converge on a useful generalization for the specific offshore
dataset. It performed significantly worse than both the 1D CNN and LSTM models. Trans­
formers inherently lack the ability to assume adjacent data points in the signal are re­
lated, and therefore require massive datasets to learn temporal relationships from scratch.
Transformers also require larger datasets to reach a good quality generalization. With only
nine months of training data, the 1D CNN and LSTM proved superior as they were able
to use the wave­loading features efficiently. Furthermore, the 1D CNN offered training
speed significantly faster than the LSTM and the Transformer.
8.7
Evaluation of AI Research Questions for SHM
The first research question asked how an AI­based system can reliably distinguish be­
tween sensor data failures and genuine structural anomalies. The result show that an
unsupervised 1D Convolutional Autoencoder, when trained on the the frequency domain
of healthy data, is able to provide a solution for the sensors. The models for the ac­
celerometers and strain gauges are able to reliably take data and determine healthy or
faulty based on a set reconstruction error threshold. For displacement transducers the
models seems to learn channel redundancy rather than signal integrity. This shows that
AI can be used to reliably distinguish between sensor data failures and genuine structural
anomalies for complex sensors.
The second research question asked if AI algorithms utilize vibration based SHM sensor
data to show varying operational modes for offshore installations. The use of HDBSCAN
with PSD features demonstrated that unsupervised clustering can successfully categorize
platform states. It successfully managed to identify events, such as the 0.9 Hz ”shivering”
event. While it is possible to identify events it is difficult to associate the identified labels
with platform operational states due to the absence of operational logs. However, it is
still possible to create labels of interest that show states that are different from dominant
state or noise. This confirms that AI algorithms can be used to translate sensor data into
operational labels that can be interpreted.
The third research question asked if AI reliably can estimate wave characteristics from
acceleration data, reducing the dependence on high cost radar systems. The findings
strongly support the hypothesis that structural accelerometers can function as an alter­
native to using a wave radar with machine learning. The developed 1D CNN multi out
regression model successfully used the structure’s response picked up by the accelerom­
eters to predict Hs, Tp with high accuracy and managed to predict wave direction with a
valid accuracy even with a physical constraint of the ground truth for wave direction be­
ing 15 km away. This confirms that deep learning models can provide a cost­effective,
redundant monitoring capability, provided that the inherent physical limitations regarding
localized wave direction are accepted.
66 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:75==
9
Conclusion
This thesis has explored the use of artificial intelligence to improve structural health mon­
itoring of offshore structures. By using historical vibration data from a North Sea platform,
three machine learning approaches were developed and validated to address three chal­
lenges. Firstly, the reliability of sensors, secondly, the identification of operational states,
and finally, the estimation of wave parameters.
Addressing the first research objective, an unsupervised sensor fault detection system
was developed using a 1D Convolutional Autoencoder. The model demonstrated an in­
credible performance for the accelerometers and strain gauges, achieving and accuracy
of above 96% and a near perfect precision of 98%+ on test sets corrupted with synthetic
faults. This shows that an AI­based system can distinguish between sensor faults ­ like
bias, drift, and complete failure ­ and real structural responses by learning the frequency
signature of healthy data. However, the thesis also found limitations in using this architec­
ture to highly correlated sensors like displacement transducers, suggestions that a hybrid
approach that uses rule­based logic with AI is necessary to completely cover a sensor
network.
For the second objective, the use of HDBSCAN clustering algorithm provided a data­
driven method for Operational Mode Labelling. Using power spectral density features,
the system managed to identify the platform’s dominant steady state and isolated distinct
short­lived events, including a specific ”shivering event” at 0.9 Hz that had additional in­
terest. While a large portion of the data was classified as ”noise”, the analysis shows
that this label effectively serves as an indicator of non­steady or transition states. This
approach removes the need for manual labeling and is an interesting alternative to exist­
ing commercial solutions. It allows for the automated detection of operational modes and
structural behaviors that are different from established operational norm.
For the third objective, a cost effective alternative to wave radars was created to estimate
wave characteristics directly from accelerometers installed on the structure. The 1D CNN
multi­output regression model was capable of predicting Significant Wave Height (Hs)
and Peak Wave Period (Tp) with high accuracy (MAE of 0.15m and 1.1s, for Hs and Tp),
effectively mirroring the output of a physical wave radar. The model also successfully
inferred wave direction within a tolerance requirement of ±45° with an MAE of 14.28°,
beating a significant challenge of physical time lag introduced by the remote location of
the ground­truth buoy. Comparative analysis showed that the 1D CNN architecture offered
the optimal balance of accuracy and computational efficiency, outperforming Transformer
architectures and matching LSTM performance while being significantly faster to train and
deploy.
Finally, an integration of the three models into an inference pipeline shows the practical
use of this work. This automates the flow from raw data ingestion to actionable insights,
this thesis also provides a blueprint for a scalable, real­time monitoring solution. The
findings confirm that machine learning is not merely a theoretical improvement but a viable
and reliable tool for structural health monitoring.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
67
==PAGE:76==
68 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:77==
10
Future Work
Even though this thesis has successfully demonstrated the viability of machine learning
for SHM on offshore platforms, there are still plenty areas of improvement that can be used
to improve the proposed models. This chapter outlines the directions for future research
and development:
• Improvement of Ground Truth Data for Wave Estimation: A large problem for
the wave estimation model was the physical distance of 15 km between the offshore
structure and the buoy. As discussed in Section 8.5, this distance causes a time lag
and spatial differences in wave direction that the model cannot handle elegantly in
all cases. To handle this issue, future work should focus on acquiring on­site ground
truth data. Deploying a temporary wave direction sensor at the platform for a period
could assist eliminating the issue of lag. Training the CNN on such dataset would
reduce the error in wave direction prediction, as the model can capture the mapping
between the structural response and the local wave conditions.
• Continuous Learning and Drift Detection: As discussed in Section 8.1, offshore
structures are subject to physical degradation and changing environmental condi­
tions due to climate factors, leading to model drift. Future implementations should
create a continuous learning pipeline or lifecycle management system. This system
would monitor the distribution of reconstruction errors and trigger retraining with re­
cent, verified ground truth data when drift is detected, ensuring the SHM system
evolves alongside the asset to maintain high reliability needed.
• Refinement of Operational Mode Labelling: The HDBSCAN use case has shown
the feasibility of unsupervised operational mode labelling. This is a significant im­
provement over the current approach that heavily relies on manual feature engi­
neering based on PSD data. The 47.57% of data being labelled as noise suggests
that while distinct events are being captured there might be a number of short­lived
events that are not captured. Future research should focus on improving feature
extraction in such a way more transient events are labelled without capturing mean­
ingless transitional states or actual noise.
• Develop Working Setup for LVDT Fault Detection: Implementing a working
model either with a hybrid approach or a purely statistical approach for the LVDT
would be beneficial for the ability to do consistent fault detection for the LVDT. As
shown in Section 7.1.3 the LVDT fails to consistently give useful results using a
CNN Autoencoder. Future work should investigate alternative solutions and model
architectures, or build the hybrid approach suggested.
• Scalability: The trained models are only usable for the specific offshore structure
the data came from. SHM is used on many types of offshore structures all over the
world. Future work should investigate if it is possible to use pre­trained weights for
transfer learning (especially for the Wave Estimation CNN). This would allow more
offshore sites to use the models and reduce time and cost of deploying deep learning
enabled SHM solutions on new assets.
• Extend Sensor Fault Models for all Sensors: Future work should find healthy
ground­truth for all data and extend the sensor fault detection to cover all the ac­
celerometers and strain gauges.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
69
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Susan Gourvenec et al. “Global assessment of historical, current and forecast
ocean energy infrastructure: Implications for marine space planning, sustainable
design and end­of­engineered­life management”. In: Renewable and Sustain­
able Energy Reviews 154 (2022), p. 111794. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111794. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032121010637.
[2]
Raihan Rahmat Rabi, Marco Vailati, and Giorgio Monti. “Effectiveness of Vibration­
Based Techniques for Damage Localization and Lifetime Prediction in Structural
Health Monitoring of Bridges: A Comprehensive Review”. In: Buildings 14.4 (2024).
ISSN: 2075­5309. DOI: 10.3390/buildings14041183. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2075-5309/14/4/1183.
[3]
Henrieke Fritz et al. “Fault Diagnosis in Structural Health Monitoring Systems
Using Signal Processing and Machine Learning Techniques”. In: Structural Health
Monitoring Based on Data Science Techniques. Ed. by Alexandre Cury et al.
Vol. 21. Structural Integrity. Springer Science and Business Media Deutsch­
land GmbH, 2022, pp. 143–164. ISBN: 9783030817152, 9783030817169. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-81716-9_7.
[4]
Jyrki Kullaa. “Distinguishing between sensor fault, structural damage, and environ­
mental or operational effects in structural health monitoring”. In: Mechanical Sys­
tems and Signal Processing 25.8 (Nov. 2011), pp. 2976–2989. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ymssp.2011.05.017. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2011.05.017.
[5]
Ayoub Keshmiry et al. “Effects of Environmental and Operational Conditions on
Structural Health Monitoring and Non­Destructive Testing: A Systematic Review”.
In: Buildings 13.4 (2023), p. 918. ISSN: 2075­5309. DOI: 10.3390/buildings13040918.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-5309/13/4/918.
[6]
Hasan Mostafaei and Mahdi Ghamami. “State of the Art in Automated Operational
Modal Identification: Algorithms, Applications, and Future Perspectives”. In: Ma­
chines 13.1 (Jan. 2025), p. 39. ISSN: 2075­1702. DOI: 10.3390/machines13010039.
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/machines13010039.
[7]
Donghyeong Ko, Bo Woo Nam, and Ju Hyuck Choi. “A Study on Dimensionality
Reduction Technique­Based Wave Estimation Using the Motion Response Spec­
tra of the Advancing Ship”. In: vol. 5B: Ocean Engineering. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, June 2024. DOI: 10.1115/OMAE2024-125608.
[8]
Jin Zhu. “Review on Structural Health Monitoring of Offshore Platform”. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 2014 (2021). The 10th International Conference on
Engineering Mathematics and Physics, 1­4 July 2021, Barcelona, Spain, p. 012019.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2014/1/012019.
[9]
Mohamed A. El­Reedy. Asset Integrity Management for Offshore and Onshore
Structures. Oxford: Gulf Professional Publishing, 2022. ISBN: 978­0­12­824540­8.
DOI: 10 . 1016 / C2020 - 0 - 01135 - 7. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / book /
9780128245408/asset-integrity-management-for-offshore-and-onshore-structures.
[10]
Emmanouil Lydakis et al. “Data­driven sensor fault diagnosis for vibration­based
structural health monitoring under ambient excitation”. In: Measurement: Journal of
the International Measurement Confederation 237 (2024), p. 115232. DOI: 10.1016/
j.measurement.2024.115232. URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/
366572592/1-s2.0-S0263224124011175-main.pdf.
70 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:79==
[11]
Hadi Pezeshki et al. “State of the art in structural health monitoring of offshore and
marine structures”. In: Maritime Engineering 176.2 (2023), pp. 89–108. DOI: 10.
1680/jmaen.2022.027. URL: https://www.emerald.com/jmaen/article-abstract/176/
2/89/423223/State-of-the-art-in-structural-health-monitoring.
[12]
Health and Safety Executive (HSE). Verification. https : / / www . hse . gov . uk /
offshore/verification.htm. Can also be accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/
20250827002906/https://www.hse.gov.uk/offshore/verification.htm. 2021.
[13]
I. T. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis. 2nd ed. Springer Series in Statistics.
New York, NY: Springer, 2002. ISBN: 978­0­387­95442­4. DOI: 10.1007/b98835.
[14]
M. I. Friswell and D. J. Inman. “Sensor validation for smart structures”. In: Journal
of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures 10.12 (1999), pp. 973–982. ISSN:
1045­389X, 1530­8138. DOI: 10.1106/GVD2-EGPN-C5B1-DPNX.
[15]
Gaetan Kerschen et al. “Sensor validation using principal component analysis”. In:
Smart Materials and Structures 14.1 (Nov. 2004), p. 36. DOI: 10.1088/0964-1726/
14/1/004. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/0964-1726/14/1/004.
[16]
Structural Vibration Solutions A/S. Operational Modal Analysis. Structural Vibration
Solutions A/S. 2023. URL: https://www.svibs.com/resources/ARTeMIS_Modal_
Help_v3/Operational%20Modal%20Analysis.html.
[17]
M. Danial A. Hasan et al. “Cluster Analysis for Automated Operational Modal Anal­
ysis: A Review”. In: MATEC Web of Conferences. Vol. 255. EDP Sciences, 2019.
DOI: 10.1051/matecconf/20192255502012. URL: https://www.matec-conferences.
org/articles/matecconf/pdf/2019/04/matecconf_eaaic2018_02012.pdf.
[18]
Ujang Riswanto. How HDBSCAN Outperforms Traditional Clustering Methods in
Real­World Scenarios. Medium. Sept. 2025. URL: https://ujangriswanto08.medium.
com/how-hdbscan-outperforms-traditional-clustering-methods-in-real-world-scenarios-
18f812e7e759.
[19]
Vermaakshra66. Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with
Noise (HDBSCAN). GeeksforGeeks. July 2025. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/machine-learning/hdbscan/.
[20]
Zhangping Wei and Andrew Davison. “A convolutional neural network based model
to predict nearshore waves and hydrodynamics”. In: Coastal Engineering 171
(2022), p. 104044. DOI: 10.1016/j.coastaleng.2021.104044.
[21]
Denis Selimović et al. “Estimation of Sea State Parameters from Ship Motion
Responses Using Attention­based Neural Networks”. In: Ocean Engineering 281
(2023), p. 114915. DOI: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2023.114915.
[22]
National Instruments. Fourier Transform (DFT and FFT). Sept. 2024. URL: https:
/ / www . ni . com / docs / en - US / bundle / diadem / page / genmaths / genmaths / calc _
fouriertransform.htm.
[23]
Dmitry Fedorov. Fast Fourier Transform. 2022. URL: https://phys.au.dk/~fedorov/
prog/2022-Csharp/book/fft.pdf.
[24]
Vibration Research Corporation. FFT vs PSD: What’s the Difference? Vibration Re­
search. Oct. 2025. URL: https://vibrationresearch.com/blog/fft-psd-difference.
[25]
Keiron O’Shea and Ryan Nash. “An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks”.
In: CoRR abs/1511.08458 (2015). arXiv: 1511.08458. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1511.08458.
[26]
Abhishek Jain. Understanding the 1D Convolutional Layer in Deep Learn­
ing. Medium. Jan. 2025. URL: https : / / medium . com / @abhishekjainindore24 /
understanding-the-1d-convolutional-layer-in-deep-learning-7a4cb994c981.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
71
==PAGE:80==
[27]
Dagang Wei. Demystifying Neural Networks: Anomaly Detection with AutoEncoder.
Medium article. Jan. 2024. URL: https://medium.com/@weidagang/demystifying-
anomaly-detection-with-autoencoder-neural-networks-1e235840d879.
[28]
Ian Young. “What does climate change mean for extreme waves? In 80% of
the world, we don’t really know”. In: PreventionWeb (Jan. 2023). URL: https :
//theconversation.com/what-does-climate-change-mean-for-extreme-waves-in-80-of-
the-world-we-dont-really-know-197526.
[29]
Silva.f.francis. “6 Types of Clustering Algorithms Beyond K­Means”. In: Medium
(Sept. 2025). URL: https://medium.com/@silva.f.francis/6- types- of- clustering-
algorithms-beyond-k-means-1bc3e6ab86c0.
[30]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and Steve Astels. How HDBSCAN Works. 2016. URL:
https://hdbscan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how_hdbscan_works.html.
[31]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, et al. hdbscan: Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise. https://pypi.org/project/hdbscan/. 2024.
[32]
Karsten Mangor and Job Dronkers. Statistical description of wave parameters.
Oct. 18, 2025. URL: https://www.coastalwiki.org/wiki/Statistical_description_of_
wave_parameters.
[33]
Nortek Group. Your guide to understanding and measuring ocean waves. https:
//www.nortekgroup.com/knowledge-center/wiki/new-to-waves. Nortek Wiki, Rev. 03.
2025.
[34]
Leo H. Holthuijsen. Waves in Oceanic and Coastal Waters. See page 28 for defini­
tion of significant wave height (Hs). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007,
pp. 1–387. ISBN: 978­0­521­86028­4. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511618536.
[35]
Rambøll. Internal Technical Report: Title Confidential. Internal Document. Internal
Rambøll document describing sensor locations and functions for the SHM system.
Title redacted for confidentiality. Rambøll, Aug. 2019.
[36]
SciPy Community. scipy.signal.decimate. SciPy. 2025. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/
doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.signal.decimate.html.
[37]
Amberle McKee. A Data Scientist’s Guide to Signal Processing. DataCamp. 2023.
URL: https : / / www . datacamp . com / tutorial / a - data - scientists - guide - to - signal -
processing.
[38]
Cory Maklin. Fast Fourier Transform Explained. Built In. Feb. 2024. URL: https:
//builtin.com/articles/fast-fourier-transform.
[39]
Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13
June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amend­
ing Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU)
2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU)
2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text with EEA relevance).
Regulation. ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj. June 13, 2024. URL:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj/eng.
[40]
Ibomoiye Domor Mienye and Theo G. Swart. “Deep Autoencoder Neural Networks:
A Comprehensive Review and New Perspectives”. In: Archives of Computational
Methods in Engineering 32 (2025). DOI: 10.1007/s11831-025-10260-5.
[41]
Rikiya Yamashita et al. “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and application
in radiology”. In: Insights into Imaging 9 (June 2018), pp. 611–629. DOI: 10.1007/
s13244-018-0639-9. URL: https://insightsimaging.springeropen.com/articles/10.1007/
s13244-018-0639-9.
[42]
TensorFlow Authors. Intro to Autoencoders. https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/
generative/autoencoder. TensorFlow Tutorials. Last updated 2024­08­16. Aug. 2024.
72 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:81==
[43]
alka1974. ReLU Activation Function in Deep Learning. GeeksforGeeks. July 2025.
URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/deep-learning/relu-activation-function-in-deep-
learning/.
[44]
aniketguhhn4. Dropout vs Weight Decay. 2024. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/data-science/dropout-vs-weight-decay/.
[45]
SciPy Community. scipy.fft.rfft ­ SciPy v1.15.2 Manual. https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy-1.15.2/reference/generated/scipy.fft.rfft.html. 2025.
[46]
Stephanie Burrell. Understanding the Hanning Window: A Practical Guide for Be­
ginners. https://wraycastle.com/blogs/knowledge-base/hanning-window. Nov. 2024.
[47]
Andreas Janz et al. EnMAP­Box User Manual: Fit StandardScaler. EnMAP­Box
Documentation, Built with Sphinx using Read the Docs theme. 2025. URL: https://
enmap-box.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usr_section/usr_manual/processing_algorithms/
transformation/fit_standardscaler.html.
[48]
Vinod Kumar G R. 07] Standardization and Normalization Techniques in Machine
Learning: StandardScaler(), MinMaxScaler(), Normalizer() & RobustScaler(). https:
//medium.com/@vinodkumargr/07-standardization-and-normalization-techniques-in-
machine-learning-standardscaler-3890a89bddbf. 2024.
[49]
Michael Frantz. Mean Squared Error (MSE) Loss Function. CodingNomads. 2025.
URL: https://codingnomads.com/mean-squared-error-loss-function.
[50]
prakharr0y. What is Adam Optimizer? Oct. 2025. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/deep-learning/adam-optimizer/.
[51]
Iliyas Karim Khan et al. “Addressing limitations of the K­means clustering algorithm:
outliers, non­spherical data, and optimal cluster selection”. In: AIMS Mathematics
9.9 (2024), pp. 25070–25097. ISSN: 2473­6988. DOI: 10 . 3934 / math . 20241222.
URL: https://www.aimspress.com/article/doi/10.3934/math.20241222.
[52]
DishaSinha. Difference between K­Means and DBScan Clustering. Oct. 2022. URL:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/dbms/difference- between- k- means- and- dbscan-
clustering/.
[53]
Martin Ester et al. “A Density­Based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in Large
Spatial Databases with Noise”. In: Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’96). Proceedings of a conference held August
2­4. Ed. by D. W. Pfitzner and J. K. Salmon. Jan. 1996, pp. 226–331.
[54]
Leland McInnes and Arize AI. How To Use UMAP and HDBScan To Surface In­
sights and Discover Issues. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5DZuRDnOGY.
Featuring the creator of UMAP, Leland McInnes. Presented at Arize:Observe 2023.
Apr. 2023.
[55]
Dhanvi Chhabra. Pearson Correlation Coefficient. GeeksforGeeks. July 2025. URL:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/maths/pearson-correlation-coefficient/.
[56]
Gen. Devin DL. Developing Multi­Target Regression Models with Python. Dec.
2023. URL: https://medium.com/@tubelwj/developing-multi-class-regression-models-
with-python-c8beca5dd482.
[57]
BowTied Raptor. Look­ahead Bias & How To Prevent Its Damage. May 2022. URL:
https://bowtiedraptor.substack.com/p/look-ahead-bias-and-how-to-prevent.
[58]
Som. Understanding L1 and SmoothL1Loss. Aug. 2023. URL: https://someshfengde.
medium.com/understanding-l1-and-smoothl1loss-f5af0f801c71.
[59]
GeeksforGeeks. What is Fully Connected Layer in Deep Learning? June 2025.
URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/deep-learning/what-is-fully-connected-layer-in-
deep-learning/.
[60]
Mohammad Abu Humaidan. Event­Driven Architecture with Google Pub/Sub: A
Practical Use Case with .NET Core and GCP. Dec. 2024. URL: https://medium.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
73
==PAGE:82==
com/@abu7midan/event-driven-design-using-google-pub-sub-real-use-case-with-net-
core-and-gcp-cc2af5182a26.
[61]
Babajide O. Ayinde and Jacek M. Zurada. “Building Efficient ConvNets using Re­
dundant Feature Pruning”. In: CoRR abs/1802.07653 (2018). arXiv: 1802.07653.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.07653.
[62]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short­Term Memory”. In: Neural
Computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[63]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[64]
Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Framewise phoneme classification with
bidirectional LSTM and other neural network architectures”. In: Neural Networks
18.5 (2005). IJCNN 2005, pp. 602–610. ISSN: 0893­6080. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neunet.2005.06.042. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0893608005001206.
[65]
Hongfei Xu et al. “Multi­Head Highly Parallelized LSTM Decoder for Neural Ma­
chine Translation”. In: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu­
ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Aug. 2021), pp. 273–282. DOI:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.23. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.23/.
[66]
Rambøll and Client. Internal email communication between Rambøll and the Client
regarding rust observed on the LVDT rod. Nov. 2024.
74 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:83==
Glossary
Accelerometer Sensor measuring linear acceleration along one or more axes. It is used
to capture vibration of offshore structures.
Autoencoder Unsupervised neural network architecture consisting of an encoder, bottle­
neck (latent space), and decoder. It is trained to reconstruct healthy data to identify
anomalies via reconstruction error.
Chebyshev Filter Type I IIR filter known for steep roll­off. It is used in this thesis during
the decimation process to efficiently prevent aliasing.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) Deep learning model that uses sliding kernels to
detect local patterns. A 1D architecture is used here for fault detection and wave
estimation.
Decimation Low­pass filtering followed by downsampling to reduce sample rate while
preventing aliasing.
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) Transforms time­domain signals to frequency do­
main for spectral analysis of structural responses.
Displacement Transducer (LVDT) Sensor measuring displacement; tracks deflections
from wave loading and structural flexibility.
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) Efficient algorithm to compute the DFT, It is a standard
tool for vibration spectral analysis.
HDBSCAN Hierarchical Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise. It
is the unsupervised algorithm used to identify operational modes.
Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) A Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture
used as a benchmark comparison against the CNN for wave parameter estimation.
Modal Analysis Identification of natural frequencies, mode shapes, and damping. It is
used for damage detection/condition assessment.
Operational Mode Labelling AI­based classification of platform operating states (e.g.,
dominant state, shivering events) from sensor data.
Power Spectral Density (PSD) Measure of a signal’s power content versus frequency.
It is used as the primary feature input for the clustering model.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) Dimensionality reduction method. It is used in
this thesis to visualize the high­dimensional cluster data in 2D space.
Reconstruction Error The difference between the input data and the Autoencoder’s re­
construction. It is used as the metric to flag sensor faults.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
75
==PAGE:84==
Sensor Fault Detection Detection of malfunctioning or corrupted sensors (e.g., bias,
drift, complete failure) to prevent false alarms.
Spectral Analysis Study of signal energy distribution over frequency to reveal reso­
nances, harmonics, and anomalies.
Strain Gauge Sensor measuring strain. Its inputs can be derived to values like axial load
and bending moment.
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) Sensor­ and data­driven assessment of structural
condition to ensure safety, reliability, and life extension.
Wave Characteristics Important sea­state parameters estimated by the model, specifi­
cally significant wave height (Hs), peak wave period (Tp), and wave direction.
Wave­Structure Interaction Wave loading and resulting responses when ocean waves
hits offshore platforms.
Welch’s Method Averaged, windowed periodogram for spectral density estimation on
noisy, long­duration data.
76 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:85==
A
Example of Broken Sensor
This is an example of a broken sensor, see Figure A.1. The sensor in question is the
ACC_1 sensor, from the 2024 dataset. This sensor is found on the far left of the western
platform. The specific channel that has issues is the vertical channel. Across all three
spectra the sensor’s behaviour is abnormal: the FFT shows no energy in the spectral
0,5­2 Hz range, yet relatively thin peaks at 6,3 Hz and some harmonic near 12,6 Hz.
This very much looks like some internal resonance or similar, not platform dynamics. The
Welch averaging, which supresses the random noise, shows the same and allows easier
reading: a large 6,3 Hz peak at almost 10−3mm/s2/Hz and a flat floor where real motion
should be, followed by the IIR filter roll­off above 13 Hz.
Figure A.1: Broken Sensor ACC_1_V
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
77
==PAGE:86==
B
Use of Logarithmic Scaling in Welch
PSD Diagrams
On Figure B.1 a comparison of a Welch PSD Estimate from the 2024 dataset can be seen
with and without a base 10 logarithmic scale applied. On the top with the log applied it is
easy to see the power at different frequencies while on the bottom graph only the large
spikes are really viewable and the smaller spikes are in most cases impossible to see.
Figure B.1: Comparison of a power spectral density (PSD) plotted on a linear scale versus
a logarithmic (base­10) scale, showing how the normal PSD becomes difficult to interpret
while the log­scaled version reveals structure more clearly.
78 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:87==
C
Rust on Displacement Transducer
The LVDT rod is susceptible to rust, as can be seen on Figure C.1. This can hinder its
movement and compromise the sensor’s accuracy. In very severe cases, corrosion may
cause the rod to seize completely, preventing any measurement.
Figure C.1: Rust can be seen on the Displacement Transducer causing friction and ef­
fecting the results. Picture provided by Rambøll[66].
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
79
==PAGE:88==
D
Significant Wave Height (Hs)
Formulation
Let η(t) denote the sea surface elevation and ¯η its mean level (here taken as 0 without
loss of generality). The time derivative of η(t) is denoted by ˙η(t) and represents the rate
of change of the surface elevation (positive when the surface is rising).
We define the zero­upcrossing times
Z = { ti | η(ti) = ¯η, ˙η(ti) > 0 },
i = 1, . . . , Nw,
so that the i­th wave is the segment η(t) for t ∈[ti, ti+1]. For each wave, let
τi = arg max
t∈[ti,ti+1]
η(t)
(crest time),
ϑi = arg min
t∈[ti,ti+1]
η(t)
(preceding trough time),
and define the individual wave height (as shown in Figure D.1) by:
Hi = η(τi) −η(ϑi),
i = 1, . . . , Nw.
Order the heights in decreasing order
H(1) = max
i
Hi ≥H(2) ≥· · · ≥H(Nw).
Let k =
⌊
Nw/3
⌋
be the number of waves in the highest third. The significant wave height
is then
Hs = 1
k
k
∑
i=1
H(i)
which is equivalently the mean of the largest k heights, i.e. the mean of the top third.
Figure D.1: Plot of an arbitrary sine wave showing a labeled preceding trough and crest,
with a dashed vertical line indicating the wave height.
80 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:89==
E
Mean Replacement Constant
Accelerometer Test
Figure E.1: The top plot shows a healthy signal being inferred through the model. The
bottom plot shows an unhealthy signal where the input has been replaced with mean
replacement. The reconstruction error is high above the threshold.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
81
==PAGE:90==
F
Correlation Matrix for Accelerometer of
February ­ April 2020 Data
On Figure F.1 a correlation matrix can be seen for all sensor channels. The E, N, and V
channels between them tend to have a higher correlation and even more when they are
close together. Overall the correlations are very spread and of varying heights. Using a
different data period will show a similar picture with slightly differing values, and in some
cases go from positive to negative correlation.
Figure F.1: ACC Channel Correlation Matrix showing Pearson correlation coefficients
among all accelerometer channels (N, E, V) across sensors. Strong positive correlations
are shown in red, negative correlations in blue.
82 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:91==
G
Displacement Transducer Sensor
Correlation
On Figure G.1 the correlation between the LVDT sensors. The LVDT sensors are placed
parallel to each other each measuring the bridge relative to the bridge landing. As shown
on the correlation matrix the correlation is a very high 0,98 between the two channels.
Figure G.1: High correlation between the LVDT sensors as they are measuring the same
bridge from parallel positions.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
83
==PAGE:92==
H
LSTM Training Run
1
Wave Estimation Training
2
Starting training with LSTM model at 2025-11-17 21:20:24,916
3
4
Selected channels:
5
ACC_1_E, ACC_1_N, ACC_1_V,
6
ACC_2_E, ACC_2_N, ACC_2_V,
7
ACC_3_E, ACC_3_N, ACC_3_V
8
9
Model: LSTM with 9 channels, window_size=1200, use_log=False, use_scaler=True
10
11
Epoch 1/200 - train 0.5875, val 0.6806
| RMSE Hs 0.2035, RMSE Tp 1.6374, Dir MAE 53.51°
12
Epoch 2/200 - train 0.3423, val 0.4552
| RMSE Hs 0.1627, RMSE Tp 1.4603, Dir MAE 35.15°
13
Epoch 3/200 - train 0.2832, val 0.5173
| RMSE Hs 0.1792, RMSE Tp 1.3876, Dir MAE 44.51°
14
Epoch 4/200 - train 0.2848, val 0.3784
| RMSE Hs 0.1978, RMSE Tp 1.5096, Dir MAE 30.31°
15
Epoch 5/200 - train 0.2383, val 0.4200
| RMSE Hs 0.1809, RMSE Tp 1.3432, Dir MAE 35.85°
16
Epoch 6/200 - train 0.2366, val 0.4617
| RMSE Hs 0.2042, RMSE Tp 1.4225, Dir MAE 36.45°
17
Epoch 7/200 - train 0.2216, val 0.4256
| RMSE Hs 0.1710, RMSE Tp 1.3537, Dir MAE 35.66°
18
Epoch 8/200 - train 0.2178, val 0.4617
| RMSE Hs 0.1588, RMSE Tp 1.3622, Dir MAE 39.47°
19
Epoch 9/200 - train 0.2038, val 0.2724* | RMSE Hs 0.1763, RMSE Tp 1.2752, Dir MAE 24.23°
20
Epoch 10/200 - train 0.2122, val 0.4682 | RMSE Hs 0.1739, RMSE Tp 1.3111, Dir MAE 36.95°
21
Epoch 11/200 - train 0.3809, val 0.5751 | RMSE Hs 0.3070, RMSE Tp 1.7220, Dir MAE 48.16°
22
Epoch 12/200 - train 0.3750, val 0.4191 | RMSE Hs 0.2229, RMSE Tp 1.8023, Dir MAE 33.98°
23
Epoch 13/200 - train 0.2795, val 0.3807 | RMSE Hs 0.2238, RMSE Tp 1.5575, Dir MAE 32.21°
24
Epoch 14/200 - train 0.2347, val 0.3173 | RMSE Hs 0.2221, RMSE Tp 1.6358, Dir MAE 24.95°
25
Epoch 15/200 - train 0.2132, val 0.3646 | RMSE Hs 0.2046, RMSE Tp 1.6649, Dir MAE 29.06°
26
Epoch 16/200 - train 0.2070, val 0.4324 | RMSE Hs 0.1619, RMSE Tp 1.4651, Dir MAE 35.25°
27
Epoch 17/200 - train 0.1912, val 0.4551 | RMSE Hs 0.1642, RMSE Tp 1.7654, Dir MAE 32.63°
28
Epoch 18/200 - train 0.1983, val 0.4025 | RMSE Hs 0.2062, RMSE Tp 1.3678, Dir MAE 32.41°
29
Epoch 19/200 - train 0.1825, val 0.4189 | RMSE Hs 0.1538, RMSE Tp 1.3105, Dir MAE 35.87°
30
Epoch 20/200 - train 0.1780, val 0.4416 | RMSE Hs 0.1646, RMSE Tp 1.3531, Dir MAE 38.35°
31
Epoch 21/200 - train 0.1762, val 0.4046 | RMSE Hs 0.1797, RMSE Tp 1.3277, Dir MAE 34.64°
32
Epoch 22/200 - train 0.1663, val 0.5404 | RMSE Hs 0.1708, RMSE Tp 1.3449, Dir MAE 44.04°
33
Epoch 23/200 - train 0.1666, val 0.3676 | RMSE Hs 0.1679, RMSE Tp 1.3577, Dir MAE 31.15°
34
Epoch 24/200 - train 0.1682, val 0.5173 | RMSE Hs 0.1809, RMSE Tp 1.3401, Dir MAE 41.40°
35
36
Early stopping at epoch 24 (best epoch = 9, best val = 0.2724)
37
38
Training Done at 2025-11-17 22:59:03,987.
39
Best epoch: 9
40
Best validation MSE: 0.2724
41
Test metrics: Test MSE: 0.1777, MAE Hs: 0.1725, RMSE Hs: 0.2255,
42
MAE Tp: 1.0507, RMSE Tp: 1.5050, Dir MAE: 16.15°, Dir RMSE: 26.46°
Figure H.1: Training results of the LSTM­based wave­parameter estimation model. Ver­
bose log output was condensed to improve readability while preserving all numerical train­
ing and evaluation metrics.
84 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:93==
I
LSTM Evaluation Diagrams
Error Metrics:
• Hs ­ MAE: 0.244 m, RMSE: 0.300 m
• Tp ­ MAE: 1.108 s, RMSE: 1.425 s
• Dir ­ MAE: 10.466 deg, RMSE: 14.652 deg
Figure I.1: LSTM Test on Nov 3 to Nov 5 2020 data showing Hs, Tp, and wave direction
performance between predicted and actual values.
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
85
==PAGE:94==
J
Inference Pipeline Output
1
*** SENSOR FAULT DETECTION ***
2
Processing ACC_3 from ...
3
Processing STR_3 from ...
4
5
FAULT DETECTION RESULTS
6
7
ACC_3:
8
Total windows: 897
9
Fault windows: 0
10
Threshold: 0.702758
11
Mean error: 0.373203
12
Max error: 0.476791
13
14
STR_3:
15
Total windows: 897
16
Fault windows: 0
17
Threshold: 1.042121
18
Mean error: 0.773048
19
Max error: 0.912245
20
21
*** WAVE ESTIMATION ***
22
Processing ACC file: OFFSHORESTRUCTURE_ACC_240607_090000_612_291.acq
23
24
window_start window_end
Hs
Tp
Dir_deg
25
0
09:00
09:05
1.792183
9.770308
322.457092
26
1
09:05
09:10
1.580110
9.856274
321.715912
27
2
09:10
09:15
1.492048
9.592198
318.951782
28
3
09:15
09:20
1.548066
10.171810
324.060425
29
4
09:20
09:25
1.866149
10.444921
326.601379
30
5
09:25
09:30
2.221083
10.707745
323.856750
31
6
09:30
09:35
2.093262
10.686381
330.588409
32
7
09:35
09:40
1.747199
10.494187
314.660522
33
8
09:40
09:45
1.938989
10.401016
325.380402
34
9
09:45
09:50
2.163371
10.298652
328.231262
35
10
09:50
09:55
2.135799
10.702648
321.301208
36
11
09:55
10:00
1.994374
10.025132
312.762634
37
38
*** OPERATIONAL MODE LABELLING ***
39
Processing ACC file: OFFSHORESTRUCTURE_ACC_240607_090000_612_291.acq
40
41
Total windows: 119
42
43
Cluster distribution:
44
Noise: 96 (80.7%)
45
Cluster 1: 15 (12.6%)
46
Cluster 0: 8 (6.7%)
Figure J.1: Inference Results of manual validation using --folder of batch from 7th of
June, 2024, showing all the models being used in the pipeline and print results. Some
verbose output has been removed for better readability.
86 Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
==PAGE:95==
Machine Learning for Structural Health Monitoring: Fault Detection and Operational Analysis of Offshore
Structures
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
