==PAGE:1==
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for
LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
Preliminary
Study
on
Environment-Resilient
Timing
Systems
for
Synchronized
Wireless
Sensor Nodes
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
Preliminary Study on Environment-Resilient Timing Systems for Synchronized Wireless
Sensor Nodes
Master Thesis
December, 2025
By
Arnór Aðalsteinsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, DTU, Building 343, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Arnór Aðalsteinsson - s232740
Signature
Date
ii
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
December 1st 2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Accurate and reliable timekeeping is an important metric in synchronized wireless sensor
nodes (WSN), particularly in low power and harsh environment conditions. This thesis
presents a preliminary study on the design and characterization of environment-resilient
timing systems, focusing on the potential use of internal microcontroller oscillators as a
low-power, simple-to-integrate and cost-effective alternative over an external temperature
compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) modules. A benchmarking setup was developed
using an ESP32 development board to evaluate oscillator stability under fluctuating envi-
ronmental conditions in a climate chamber. Data processing of measured parameters was
performed using standard IEEE-certified Allan-based statistical metrics commonly used
in oscillator characterizations. From these metrics, guard times for two-node communi-
cation were derived, accounting for both stochastic timing fluctuations and deterministic
biases such as nominal frequency offsets and temperature dependencies.
Results indicate that standard internal RC oscillators exhibit significant linear drift and
strong sensitivity to temperature variations. Using the internal oscillator with an external
low frequency crystal significantly improves performance at a minimal additional current
consumption. Static compensation methods to reduce linear drift prove highly effective
and furthermore, temperature benchmarking demonstrates strong potential for software-
based temperature compensation of the internal oscillator. Furthermore, results indicate
that varying temperature gradients affect the compensation control loop of the TCXOs pro-
portionally more than the intrinsic behaviour of the oscillator itself. While external TCXOs
provide substantially improved stability over the internal oscillators, their nominal current
consumption outweighs the energy savings achieved through the reduced guard times
they enable.
The study also addresses hardware design improvements for both the benchmarking
setup and the deployed sensor node, and outlines areas for future research.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Arnór Aðalsteinsson, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Erik Gottschalk, PhD student at DTU Elektro
Main supervisor of the thesis, whose insights and guidance were helpful throughout the
project. Thanks to Erik, I established a solid direction for the project which strengthened
the overall quality and focus of the thesis.
Simon Remy Langlais, Research Assistant at DTU
Main project developer, who I greatly enjoyed company with and who helped me get ideas
for implementations and design choices. Simon also provided valuable experience and
suggestions during the writing of this thesis which were immensely helpful.
Martin Nordal Petersen, Associate Professor at DTU Fotonik
Second supervisor of the thesis. Grateful for the opportunity to participate in this emerging
project.
iv
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Prior & Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
7
2.1
ArcLoRaM Network Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Oscillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Oscillator Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
15
3.1
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
System Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Measurement Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Measurements
23
4.1
Baseline Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Temperature Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Power Consumption Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Guard Time Simulation
39
5.1
Energy Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Oscillator Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Hardware Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As climate change accelerates, research on Earth’s icecaps becomes increasingly impor-
tant. Greenland, home to one of the largest icecaps, has growing scientific attention with
many studies aiming to capture key metrics regarding its composition profile. Factors such
as temperature, humidity, ice viscosity, salinity and mineral composition [1]. Conducting
research in Greenland, however, is challenging due to the harsh weather conditions, a
sparsely populated landscape, and the limited communication infrastructure. In remote
regions, sensor data is typically stored locally until it can be manually retrieved, requiring
field expeditions by foot or helicopter. These logistical factors limit the number of feasible
measurement sites. Consequently, there is a need to expand the coverage of measure-
ment locations without relying on manual data offloading at each site.
The project covers the hardware implementation of a Mesh network protocol that aims to
provide a platform for communication in rural areas where cell towers and network infras-
tructure are not readily available. The focus of the project will be Arctic deployment, and
thus requirements are defined accordingly. Prior development done by Simon Langlais,
took into account various different use cases of scientific research groups currently in op-
eration in Greenland.
The nature of the protocol relies heavily on robust synchronization between nodes. Ef-
fective time synchronization is a determining factor in the efficiency of a sensor network.
Therefore, it is critical for energy-constrained application that time synchronization is op-
timized. Time synchronization depends on two main aspects: the synchronization algo-
rithm, which defines how nodes are synchronized with each other while balancing energy
consumption and performance, and the stability of the node clocks. The latter being the
focus of this project. Oscillators tend to drift over time relative to an ideal reference. Opti-
mizing hardware to minimize this drift is crucial for maintaining network performance and
the overall viability of the project [2].
Over the course of the project the work was structured into several key stages. First, an
extensive survey of potential clock configurations was conducted to identify suitable can-
didates to further investigate. Next, a dedicated benchmarking setup was designed and
implemented to enable accurate characterization of oscillator performance under realistic
operating conditions. This was followed by comprehensive benchmarking, during which
data was collected and processed to evaluate clock stability and drift behaviour. Addi-
tionally, compensation techniques were expolred including both static correction and pre-
liminary temperature compensation. Based on the measured stability parameters, guard
time requirements were derived as a function of the resynchronization interval and the en-
ergy consumption associated with the guard time was estimated from the guard time as
a function of both the resynchronization interval and the system awake current. For this
a simple node-to-node guard time model was derived analytically. Finally, potential hard-
ware design improvements were proposed to guide future iterations of the system, includ-
ing design recommendations for the hardware implementation of the protocol. Together,
these results form a basis for the hardware design of the emerging mesh communication
platform.
1.1
Problem Statement
The emerging mesh communication protocol relies on precise time synchronization across
participating nodes, built on the Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) scheme. Within
this scheme, transmitting and receiving nodes must wake up within the same time window
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
1
==PAGE:10==
to exchange data successfully. Any timing mismatch increases the probability of missed
frames, leading to reduced reliability and unnecessary power expenditure. Achieving ro-
bust synchronization thereofre requires clock hardware with predictable and well-characterized
stability. The goal of this research is to identify suitable oscillator configurations, evaluate
their performance, and determine how hardware characteristics influence synchronization
accuracy and overall energy efficiency.
1.2
Objectives
The objectives of this project is to establish a systematic foundation for selecting oscil-
lators suitable for low-power, environmentally challenging deployements. The work aims
to support both academic and industrial applications by outlining a methodology for eval-
uating oscillator stability, drift behaviour, compensation strategies, and their impact on
protocol-level performance. The specific goals of the project include:
• Identify and evaluate relevant oscillator options for the target deployment conditions.
• Develop a measurement setup capable of accurately characterizing oscillator drift
and stability.
• Benchmark oscillators under various operating conditions, including temperature
variations.
• Analyze stability metrics to determine oscillator parameters and performance limits.
• Derive analytical expressions for guard time as a function of resynchronization in-
terval and oscillator stability.
• Investigate temperature compensation strategies and assess their effectiveness.
• Evaluate the influence of oscillator choice on overall system power consumption
with respect to varying resynchronization intervals and nominal system current con-
sumption.
• Provide recommendations that support future implementation within the Arctic LoRa
Mesh Network Protocol project.
1.3
Prior & Related Work
1.3.1
ArcLoRaM
This project builds upon the ArcLoRaM platform developed in Simon Langlais’s master
thesis, which has a played an important role in defining the requirements and focus areas
of this work [3]. The thesis details the protocol design, including its custom Tim-Divison
Multiple Access (TDMA) structure, routing strategy, and self-healing properties. Familiar-
ity with this protocol structure is recommended for the reader to get a full context of the
current project.
1.3.2
Allan Deviation and time-domain metrics (TDEV) for guard-time
design
Frequency stability metrics such as Allan deviation and the modified Allan deviation are
standard tools for characterizing oscillator noise. Time deviation (TDEV), derived from
MDEV, converts instantaneous fractional frequency fluctuations into an expected timing
error in seconds and is the correct metric for guard time estimation in TDMA systems.
Institutional references [4] explain these metrics, their interpretation and when to prefer
MDEV/TDEV over ADEV for time-domain design. This project follows this established
analysis path, using overlapped estimators for more statistical robustness, and using
TDEV to derive guard time estimates.
2
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:11==
1.3.3
Mesh networks and relevant systems
There are several recent efforts exploring mesh/peer-to-peer networking for challeng-
ing environments, including space/planetary applications where timing and long delays
are critical. NASA hosts open source repositories [5] and work on mesh networking and
disruption-tolerant networking. This public repository documents a NASA mesh network
communication system intended for small satellite constellations and comparable peer-
to-peer scenarios. NASA and other space agencies have also published work on time-
synchronization challenges for delay tolerant networks which share high-level goals with
this thesis: to provide reliable communication in harsh environments. They, however,
differ in important aspects such as node hierarchy and the presence of dynamically mov-
ing nodes. The NASA work serves as an interesting parallel and a source of potential
implementation ideas for the development of the protocol. [6]
1.4
Scope
This project is an initiative by DTU Electro in collaboration with DTU Arctic, aimed at
evaluating and optimizing oscillator hardware for robust mesh network communication in
Arctic environments. The focus is on energy-efficient synchronization between nodes in a
TDMA-based protocol, with special consideration for harsh environmental conditions and
temperature variability.
1.4.1
Requirements
The project addresses the following requirements:
• Arctic-grade temperature tolerance: The oscillator hardware should be capable
of operating in Arctic-like temperatures, with corresponding temperature fluctuations
and variability.
• Low energy consumption: Energy consumption should be minimized, particularly
the power cost associated with guard times and resynchronization events.
• Cost-effective hardware: Since the protocol targets low-cost, large-scale deploy-
ments, oscillator hardware must be economically viableuitable for cost-constrained
sensor nodes.
• Protocol compatibility: The hardware must be easy to interface with the protocol
stack and must not impose excessive software or hardware complexity.
• Fast startup time: Because the system relies on many sleep-wake duty cycling, the
oscillator must support quick startup and stabilization times to avoid unnecessary
active power consumption.
• Compactness: The system needs to be relatively compact.
1.4.2
Limitations
• Only two-node guard time estimation is considered; full network topology effects on
guard time are outside the scope.
• The project focuses on hardware-level oscillator performance, protocol algorithm
development beyond TDMA scheduling is not addressed.
• Only select compensation techniques (static and temperature-based) are applied or
discussed, other advanced compensation techniques are not covered.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
3
==PAGE:12==
1.5
Nomenclature
Before the work is covered it is important to define terms involved.
Parts-per-million, ppm, is a dimensionless unit representing a ratio of one part per million
parts commonly used to measure fractional changes or errors. For example, an oscillator
drifting at 1 ppm will gain or lose 1 µs every second.
Offset represents the cumulative timing error of an oscillator relative to a reference clock.
It is measured as the deviation in time or frequency from the expected value over a given
interval. Offset provides a direct indication of how far the clock has drifted since the
previous synchronization point.
Drift quantifies the rate of change of the offset, often measured in ppm. It is measured
in the system as the incremental difference in offset between successive samples and
corresponds to the first derivative of the offset with respect to time. Drift offers insight
into how rapidly the oscillator is diverging from the reference and is strongly influenced by
factors such as temperature, aging, and intrinsic oscillator stability.
Accuracy is the capability of an oscillator to maintain a frequency that is known in terms
of the definition of the second. For a 32.768 kHz oscillator, this translates to 32768 cycles
adopted as the second. This translates to a zero-crossing every 30.52 µs. Any deviation
to this specification would degrade its accuracy metric. These deviations are denoted as
drift and is measured in ppm.
Stability is the property of an oscillator to resist changes in its frequency. A high-stability
oscillator is not necessarily equivalent to an accurate one.
Q-factor is a dimensionless measure of how sharply an oscillator resonates. It describes
the ratio between the energy stored in the resonator and the energy lost per cycle. A higher
Q-factor means that the oscillator has low energy loss, a narrow resonance bandwidth,
and therefore a more stable and precise frequency.
Precision is the ability of an oscillator to return to a previously calibrated frequency. For
example, if during a temperature decrease the measured clock drift between a set interval
increases. If the effect reverts back to the original state, the precision is the measure of if
it returns to the same drift as before.
Fractional frequency is the normalized frequency difference between the instantaneous
frequency f(t) and the nominal frequency f0.
f(t) −f0
f0
(1.1)
Temperature coefficient, αT , is the rate at which the oscillator drift changes with temper-
ature measured in ppm
◦C .
r-value, correlation coefficient, is a dimensionless statistic ranging from -1 to 1 that mea-
sures the strength and direction of a linear relationship between two variables. An r close
to 1 indicates strong positive correlation, r close to -1 indicates strong negative correlation,
and r near 0 indicates little or no linear correlation.
p-value is a probability value used in hypothesis testing to quantify the likelihood that a
result has occurred by chance. A small p (typically < 0.05) indicates that the observed
result is less likely to occur by chance, while a larger p-value indicates it is more likely.
Node is defined as an entity that communicates through a network protocol.
4
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:13==
Variation is a measure of how much a quantity changes over time or across a dataset. The
fractional frequency variation of an oscillator is the difference between its instantaneous
frequency and its nominal frequency, divided by the nominal frequency, integrated over
time.
Deviation is a measure derived from variation, representing the RMS of the variations over
a specific averaging time. Deviation provides a normalized indication of stability, making
it easier to compare different oscillators.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
ArcLoRaM Network Protocol
ArcLoRaM is a protocol intended to enable network communication in rural areas with
lacking network infrastructure. The network’s topology uses a mesh-of-stars architec-
ture which eliminates the possibility of a single point of failure that could be caused by
the loss of a network master. A mesh connected network is a topology in which nodes
connect directly, dynamically and non-hierarchically to other nodes. In such networks,
each node can act as both an endpoint and a router, forwarding packets on behalf of its
neighbors. This provides self-healing properties. When a node fails, moves or becomes
temporarily unreachable due to environmental conditions, the network can automatically
reconfigure and reroute traffic along alternate paths. This robustness is important in Arc-
tic deployements, where harsh weather, snow coverage, and limited accessibility make
node outages inevitable.
The reliability of mesh routing is combined with the energy efficiency of star configura-
tion. In the star portion of the architecture, nodes communicate with a designated relay
within their local cluster. This reduces routing complexity and keeps in-cluster commu-
nication lightweight and efficient. Star topologies are an attractive option for low-power
systems as end-nodes can remain asleep for long periods and only wake to exchange
short, scheduled bursts of data. This means that the hardware capability requirements
for the end-nodes are drastically lower, further increasng their lifespan. Whereas the re-
lay must handle timing, synchronization, and collection of data from end-nodes, thereby
reducing their overhead.
In scientific deployments, it is common for sensor density within a region to be high. The
star topology accomodates this by grouping end-nodes into well-structured clusters, al-
though the increased local activity that relays need to handle from end-nodes can intro-
duce interference during mesh-level operations. Reducing the interference effect is typ-
ically done by positioning the clusters near their maximum intended transmission range,
reducing overlap between communication zones and limiting cross-cluster interference.
ArcLoRaM’s protocol is designed with power efficiency as its core focus, as such the
channel access strategy used is the Time-Division Multiple Access (TDMA) communica-
tion scheme. TDMA is a channel access method which offers a way for several nodes to
share the same frequency channel by splitting the channel into time slots. This means
that each node receives their own designated time slot. Nodes then take turns transmit-
ting and receiving data according to a set schedule and rules. The protocol additionally
supports multi-hop commmunication capability which extends transmission range with ad-
ditional energy costs.
The protocol organizes nodes into three functional classes: gateways, relays, and end-
nodes, each with increasing capability and responsibility. This hierarchy creates efficient
routing, scalable deployement and a cost-effective distribution of hardware requirements.
Gateways serve as sinks for all traffic and act as the bridge between the ArcLoRaM net-
work and external infrastructure. Their primary role is to collect uplink data, forward it to a
network server, and broadcast system-wide control messages when required. Because
gateway failure would otherwise represent a critical point of failure, implementations typi-
cally include multiple gateways, ensuring redundancy and load balancing. The gateways
must stay time synchronized at all times and have a high throughput connection. They
also serve as high-level management tasks, such as adjusting network-wide reporting
rates or triggering energy-saving modes in response to some environmental conditions.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
7
==PAGE:16==
Relays form the backbone of the mesh layer. They forward packets between clusters,
maintain connectivity during topology changes, and may additionlly host their own sen-
sors. Upon receiving a packet, a relay selects the most appropriate next hop which allows
the mesh to adapt dynamically without centralized coordination. Relays should be spaced
near their maximum transmission range to limit interference and need more hardware ca-
pability due to the through traffic they handle. They typically feature larger batteries and
antennas to support the increased demands.
End-nodes are the simplest and most numerous devices in the system, optimized for low-
power consumption and long lifespan. Their primary function is to collect sensor data and
deliver to a nearby relay. End-nodes operate at reduced transmission power and rely on
the structured timing and local coordination provided by the star configuration, which mini-
mizes awake time. This design keeps hardware costs low and allows dense deployments
of sensors without significantly increasing network complexity.
This information is drawn from Simon Langlais’s master thesis and is therefore a highly
recommended reading for further information about the protocol [3].
2.2
Oscillators
Oscillators are electronic circuits that generate a continuous, periodic output signal, from
a DC power source. They are a fundamental building blocks in electronics, providing tim-
ing references for digital systems, the carrier frequency for communication protocols and
stable clocks for measurement equipments.
At the core of an oscillator is the frequency selective network which is typically built from
active components involving capacitors, inductors or a resonant mechanical element such
as crystal. This network determines the natural frequency of the oscillator. To uphold
these oscillations, the circuit includes a feedback loop that feeds a portion of the output
signal back to the input with the correct phase and amplitude. Without it, the energy losses
in the resonant element would slowly shut down the oscillations.
Different oscillator designs offer different trade-offs in terms of cost, frequency accuracy,
temperatue stability and noise performance. RC oscillators are, for example, inexpensive
and simple but suffer from poor frequency stability due to the temperature and aging sen-
sitivity of resistors and capacitors. LC oscillators offer better stability, especially at higher
frequencies, but their inductors and capacitors are still sensitive to component tolerances
and environmental variations. Crystal oscillators, however, achieve far superior stability
because their resonance is based on the mechanical vibration of a quartz crystal rather
than electrical components. Quartz crystals use the piezo-electric, which converts electri-
cal energy into mechanical deformation and vice versa. When a voltage is applied across
the crystal, it mechanically compresses, and when decompressing, it generates an elec-
trical signal. This interaction allows the crystal to oscillate at a very stable natural resonant
frequency which is determined by its geometry and cut. Because of this mechanical reso-
nance and the crystal’s extremely high quality factor (Q-factor), crystal oscillators maintain
a very narrow bandwidth and exhibit minimal frequency drift over time. They are therefore
the preferred choice in applications that require precise timing such as microcontrollers,
wireless communication systems and time synchronized protocols such as ArcLoRaM.
[7] For applications requiring even higher frequency stability, specialized crystal oscilla-
tors are used. Temperature-Compensated Crystal Oscillators (TCXOs) actively adjust
the frequency of the crystal to compensate for temeprature-induced drift. They achieve
this through internal circuitry that applies a corrective voltage or adjustment based on the
measrued temperature, keeping the output frequency close to its nominal value across
a wide temperature range. TCXOs are widely used in communication and timing sys-
tems because they strike a balance between performance, cost and power consumption.
8
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:17==
For this project, TCXOs are a good candidate as they are relatively inexpensive, have
fast startup times compatible with the protocol’s wake-sleep cycle, and are comercially
available in compact modules fitting into the requirements for the project defined in Sec-
tion 1.4.1. [8]
For even higher stability, Oven-Controlled Crystal Oscillators (OCXOs) maintain the crys-
tal at a constant temperature by using an integrated heating element and a thermistor.
These form together a part of a bridge-network feedback loop to hold the crystal at a fixed
temperature. This minimizes the drift from external temperature variations by keeping
the oscillator locked at the same temperature. The trade-offs, however, are higher power
consumption, larger size and cost, making them not match with the criteria defined in
Section 1.4.1. [9]
At the extreme end of the spectrum are Chip-Scale Atomic Clocks (CSACs), which provide
unmatched stability by referencing atomic transitions rather than mechanical resonances.
CSACs can maintain frequency accuracy on the order of 10−18. They are, however, sig-
nificantly more expensive, require careful thermal management, and have higher startup
times. While suitable for highly demanding applications, they are overkill for this project.
[10]
Overall, crystal oscillators and TCXO modules are the most suitable candidates for the Ar-
cLoRaM project. TCXOs have superior frequency stability compared to standard crystal
oscillators, though typically at a higher cost. Standard crystal oscillators are readily avail-
able as internal oscillators on many microcontrollers, providing an inexpensive option with
reasonable stability.
2.2.1
Influences on Oscillator Frequency
In practice, oscillator frequency is never perfectly constant. Oscillators drift due to a com-
bination of environmental conditions, electrical factors, mechanical stresses and inherent
physical limitations of the crystal. The following subsections summarize the main mech-
anisms that contribute to oscillator drift. This section is largely based on the information
provided in the Quartz Crystal Fundamentals: Application Note produced by Hewlett-
Packard in 1997. [11]
Temperature Variation
Temperature has one of the most significant impacts on crystal frequency. The sensitivity
to temperature is determined by the crystal’s temperature coefficient, αT , which depends
on the cut and orientation of the quartz (AT-cut, BT-cut). Temperature effect has a major
effect on the crystal frequency. The degree of frequency variation is determined by the
crystal temperature coefficient, a parameter that is derived from the cut of the crystal.
Aging
Aging refers to the gradual frequency change occurring over months or years. It is caused
by internal proccesses such as stress of the mounting structure and slow changes in the
crystal’s elasticity. Aging can be partially compensated through trimming mechanisms
such as adjustable capacitors or digital calibration.
Noise Processes
Noise processes originating from the crystal and surrounding electronics can cause short-
term frequency variations. These fluctuations are typically measured using time-domain
stability metrics such as the Allan deviation, which quantify the fractional frequency fluc-
tuations over an averaging interval τ.
Power Supply Variation
Crystal oscillators rely on stable voltage for stable operation. Variations in this supply
can change the drive level of the crystal, introducing frequency shift and added jitter.
While often small, these effect accumulate in long-term measurements. Using low-noise
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
9
==PAGE:18==
regulators and proper decoupling reduces supply drift and improves oscillator stability. For
onboard oscillators on microcontrollers, supply-related drift and jitter should be carefully
managed through layout and decoupling. TCXO modules are generally less sensitive to
supply variations because they include internal compenstation and regulation. In contrast,
the internal oscillator of a microcontroller cannot be directly regulated, so stability relies
entirely on providing a clean supply to the microcontroller, decoupling and careful layout.
Load Capacitance
A crystal’s operating frequency depends heavily on its load capacitance. If the effective
load capacitance differs from the specified value, the oscillator will shift in frequency and
thus reduce accuracy. The effective load capacitance is a combination of the external ca-
pacitors and parasitic capacitances due to traces, pins and wiring. Setups on breadboards
typically introduce large parasitics. A dedicated PCB minimizes the effect by allowing for
shorter and more controlled connections which enables load capacitance closer to the
inteded design.
Gravitational Effects
The earth’s gravitational force causes a stress related frequency effect that varies with
the physical orientation of the frequency when rotated to another orientation. That is to
say, if an oscillator is operating at a certain frequency in one orientation, the frequency
can alter when rotated to another orientation. Typical offsets for 180◦rotation are on the
scale of roughly 2 × 10−9. This effect is also experienced during acceleration.
Shock
Mechanical shock temporarily deforms the crystal or its mounting structure, causing in-
stantaneous frequency shifts. This can result in a change of frequency of 1 × 10−9 per
G. A crystal oscillator can usually withstand 30G half-sine wave shock for 11 milliseconds
without irreparable damage.
Vibration
Shaking the crystal oscillator causes stress in the crystal that affects the average fre-
quency in the long term. In the short term, the frequency is expected to change by 1×10−9
per G.
Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic interference originate from sources in the vicinity of the oscillator. Careful
design, placing the oscillator away from switching elements will reduce the effect, the use
of torroids in the oscillator will reduce the effects to insignificant values.
Retrace
Retrace refers to the slight difference between an oscillator’s operating frequency before
and after a power interruption. Similarly, thermal hysteresis occurs when the frequency
does not return to its original value after a temperature variation. Both effects arise from
internal mechanical stress rearrangements inside the crystal package.
2.3
Oscillator Characterization
When analyzing oscillators, it is natural to think about performing spectrum analysis of
the drift to understand what frequency components it is comprised of. However, the FFT
cannot be applied meaningfully to oscillator drift signals, as oscillators violate the funda-
mental mathematical assumptions required by the Fourier transform.
The Fourier transform assumes that the input signal is stationary: its mean must remain
constant, its variance must not change over time, and its autocorrelation must be time-
invariant. Oscillator drift breaks all of these conditions. Real oscillators exhibit slow fre-
quency drift due to static frequency offsets, temperature dependencies, aging effect, and
random-walk frequency noise. As a consequence, the mean frequency is not stable as
10
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:19==
the oscillator may drift at a different rate an hour into the measurement than it did at the
beginning. Because the frequency is evolving in time, the average frequency is not stable.
One hour into the measurement, the oscillator may be drifting at a different rate than at
the beginning. Oscillators also do not have constant variance. Instead, their noise grows
with time due to various noise processes such as white frequency noise, flicker noise
and random walk noise. For random walk noise, the variance grows larger the longer
the measurement is run, without ever returning to a stable mean. Oscillators also violate
the assmption of time-invariant aurocorrelation. Oscillators have an inherent memory,
their drift today is correlated with the drift yesterday. But the strength of that correla-
tion changes with time. For example an oscillator may drift faster in the beginning of a
measurement but then slow down as it warms up. Then drift again due to environmental
changes. Because these correlations change over time, the signal is not time-invariant.
2.3.1
Allan Variance
Allan variance was specifically developed to address this issue, remaining valid even
when the signal is non-stationary and contains long-term drift. Instead of analyzing fre-
quency content directly, Allan variance measures stability as a function of averaging time,
making it more suitable for characterizing real oscillator behaviour. The averaging time,
typically denoted by τ represents the length of the time interval over which thre frequency
or phase is averaged before calculating the variance. By choosing different averaging
time, the oscillator behaviour over short, medium and long durations can be observed.
Small averaging time captures high-frequency fluctuations and short-term noise, while
longer averaging times smooth out these rapid variations and reveal slower processes
like temperature drift, aging or random-walk frequency noise. Essentially, τ provides in-
formation regarding the stability of the oscillator at different timescales, allowing us to
identify which types of noise dominate over different intervals. Plotting the Allan variance
as a function of τ gives insight into the regions of best stability, important metric when
assessing optimal resynchronization time between nodes for the protocol.
When measuring drift, the standard setup involves an oscillator under test along with a
highly stable reference oscillator to compare to at a uniform sampling interval τ0. Let xi
denote the time reading of the oscillator under test at sample i with the sampling interval
τ0. For an averaging time τ = nτ0, the two-sample Allan variance is defined in the time
domain as
σ2
x(τ) =
1
2τ 2(N −2n)
N−2n
)
i=0
"
xi+2n −2xi+n + xi
#2
(2.1)
In the equivalent frequency denoted format, the averaged fractional frequency deviations
is used instead. This format is generally considered more traditional.
σ2
y(τ) =
1
2(N −1)
N−1
)
k=1
(¯yk+1 −¯yk)2,
¯yk = xk+n −xk
τ
.
(2.2)
The two-sample Allan variance, more commonly referred to simply as the Allan variance,
is a standard metric of frequency stability from IEEE [12] [13] [14].
Allan Variance is typically plotted as the Allan deviation (ADEV), σy(τ), on a log-log scale.
Different noise processes produce certain slopes at certain averaging intervals τ. This
makes it possible to identify dominant noise processes over different averaging intervals.
In practical systems, only a few regions tend to appear clearly.
• Short averaging times (τ), are typically dominated by white frequency noise, giving
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
11
==PAGE:20==
an ADEV slope of approximately −1/2. This reflects uncorrelated, broadband noise
sources such as thermal noise within the oscillator electronics.
• Intermediate averaging times (τ), often show flicker frequency noise, which appears
as a flat region with slope 0. This noise originates from 1/f-type processes in active
components, materials or bias circuitry.
• Long averaging times tend to show random walk frequency noise which gives an
ADEV slope of approximately 1/2. This behaviour reflects slow environmental or
physical processes such as temperature drift or aging.
These regions allow allan variance analysis to reveal which physical mechanisms domi-
nate the oscillator’s instability at different timescales. This provides indication on whether
a low-hanging fruit could be to improve the electronics, improve environmental control
somehow or implement compensation strategy. [15]
2.3.2
Improved Allan-Based Stability Metrics
Allan variance estimators are useful for characterising oscillator stability, but are limited
by the number of non-overlapping samples availale in practice. Modern stability analy-
sis therefore relies on improved estimators that extract more information from the same
dataset and provide metrics directly relevant to timing uncertainty. Overlapped estima-
tors help with this issue by reusing all possible overlapping sample intervals, increasing
the available sample pool and thereby significantly improving the statistic. This becomes
more and more significant as τ increases, where classical estimators suffer from decreas-
ing number of usable sample pairs as is illustrated in Figure 2.1.[16]
Figure 2.1: Overlapped averaging intervals τ compared to non-overlapped averaging in-
tervals τ. Using overlapped τ generates a greater number of samples from the same
dataset.[16]
Overlapped Allan Variance And Allan Deviation (OADEV)
The overlapped Allan de-
viation (OADEV) is an extension of the standard Allan deviation, designed to make full
use of the dataset by allowing overlapping frequency-difference samples. For frequency
data yk sampled at rate
1
τ0 with an averaging factor m (corresponding to τ = mτ0) the
12
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:21==
OADEV is the square root of OAVAR which is is defined as:
σ2
y(τ, M) =
1
2m2(M −2m + 1)
M−2m+1
)
j=1



j+m−1
)
i=j
(yi+m −yi)



2
(2.3)
with M corresponding to the length of the dataset. Because OADEV is calculated from
fractional frequency data, it is dimensionless and cannot be used directly for quantifying
time error in TDMA slot alignment.[16]
Modified Allan Deviation (MDEV)
The Modified Allan Deviation extends OADEV by
applying an additional averaging step that makes it possible to separate different high
frequency noise types that appear identical in the standard Allan analysis. MDEV is the
square root of the MVAR which is defined as:
mod σ2
y(τ) =
1
2m4(M −3m + 2)
M−3m+2
)
j=1



j+m−1
)
i=j
* t+m−1
)
k=1
(yk+m −yk)
+


2
(2.4)
MDEV is particularly useful because its definition leads to the Time Deviation (TDEV)
used in timing applications. In other words, MDEV acts as the bridge between frequency-
domain stability metrics like OADEV to time-domain stability metrics such as TDEV.[16]
Time Deviation (TDEV)
Time Deviation, TDEV, is the stability metric that corresponds
to absolute time fluctuations rather than fractional frequency fluctuations. TDEV can be
derived from the Modified Allan Deviation (MDEV). For a stationary oscillator, TDEV is the
square root of TVAR which is defined as:
σx(τ)2 =
*
τ 2
3
+
· mod σ2
y(τ)
(2.5)
where mod σ2
y(τ) is the Modified Allan variation at averaging time τ. The factor of τ con-
verts the fractional frequency fluctuations into timing uncertainty. This makes TDEV the
appropriate metric for estimating the guard time in TDMA systems, where absolute time
alignment between nodes is critical.[16][17]
2.3.3
Guard Time Estimation
In time-division multiple access (TDMA) communication systems, one communication
channel is shared between multiple nodes by transmitting in distinct time slots. There-
fore, transmissions are prone to overlap if timing uncertainties reach a certain threshold.
To counter this, many systems insert a guard time between successive slots. The guard
time provides a buffer that compensates for clock drift and synchronization errors accu-
mulated between re-synchronization events. The guard time is a critical design parameter
from an energy efficiency point of view. Inbetween cycles, nodes enter a sleep state to
reduce energy consumption. A larger guard time increases reliability and chances for
a successful communication but forces the node to stay awake longer, thus consuming
more power. On the other hand, if the guard time is too small there are risks for unsuc-
cessful communication if the two nodes’ local clocks drift too far apart. It is therefore very
important to perform accurate estimation of the guard time for balancing synchronization
reliability against power efficiency. The following section covers a simple two-node model
for the estimation of guard time.
To estimate the appropriate guard time in a two-node TDMA system, the TDEV metric can
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
13
==PAGE:22==
be used to quantify the accumulated timing uncertainty over time. The optimal resynchro-
nization time can be approximated at the point where TDEV reaches a minimum, which
represents the moment of greatest timing certainty. However, it is not guaranteed that a
clear minimum exists in all cases. For some oscillators, TDEV may increase continuously
with averaging time. In those cases, the timing uncertainty, and as a result, the guard
time are ever-increasing. When a minimum does occur, it typically is located between
regions dominated by high frequency noise (small τ) and low frequency noise (large τ).
For a two-node system, the oscillator in each node has their own timing uncertainty. The
combined timing uncertainty between the two nodes can be estimated by taking the root-
sum-square (RSS) of the individual TDEVs:
σx,tot(τ) =
,
σ2
x,A(τ) + σ2
x,B(τ)
(2.6)
where A and B refer to nodes A and B. Even if both nodes use the same oscillator
model, they can have different variances because of factors previously discussed in Sec-
tion 2.2.1. The metric σx,tot represents the total timing uncertainty for the two-node system
at averaging itnerval τ.
In addition to the timing uncertainties, oscillator also have deterministic biases such as
nominal frequency offsets and temperature-dependent drift. In this model, each oscilla-
tor is assumed to have a nominal static frequency drift, r0, and a certain temperature-
dependent component, r(Θ) = αT (∆Θ), where ∆Θ is the ◦C change in temperature and
αT is the temeprature coefficient expressed in ppm
◦C . From this assumption, over a duration
of ∆T, the deterministic time offset can be predicted:
∆tbias(Θ) = |r0 + r(Θ)| · ∆T
(2.7)
Temperature-compensated oscillators such as TCXOs have a much smaller temperature-
dependent component compared to non-temperature-compensated crystal oscillators,
which can experience significant change in drift with respect to temperature. The tem-
perature coefficient for the oscillators can be derived from the slope of the measured
temperature-drift correlation.
The total guard time can then be computed by combining the stochastic timing uncertainty
and deterministic bias:
G(τ) = k · σx,tot(τ) + ∆tbias(Θ)
(2.8)
= k · σx,tot(τ) + |r0 + r(Θ)| · ∆T
(2.9)
Here, k is the safety factor that is selected based on reliability requirements. Because
missed TDMA slots costs a lot of energy, higher safety factors are preferable.
This guard time model is relatively simple and does not take into account the larger com-
munication network properties such as the topology, number of nodes, network depth et
cetera. Future implementations could therefore work on deriving a more sophisticated
model for guard time. A detailed analytical derivation of guard time for TDMA-based net-
works is presented in [18]. However, the assumptions and protocol structure in that work
differ from the ArcLoRaM project and were therefore not adopted here.
14
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
The objective of the benchmarks is to provide a numerical basis for deciding between
using an internal oscillator, featured on a microcontroller, or an external TCXO module.
Using the internal oscillator has several advantages, it simplifies future implementations
and interfacing, it is more power efficient and is a lower-cost option. Addionally, a require-
ment was set to achieve micro-second level resolution in clock measurements, ensuring
that any sub-millisecond timing capabilities of the oscillators can be recorded. The bench-
marking approach focuses on quantitatively comparing the two oscillator options across
performance metrics that are relevant to the ArcLoRaM project. Primary metrics include
the frequency stability, temperature sensitivity and power consumption.
Benchmarks are conducted using a reference oscillator with known stability to compare
each test oscillator. Timing data is then collected over extended periods to capture both
short-term and long-term drift effects. Temperature-controlled equipment is then used to
isolate and assess thermal effects. All measurements are sampled at uniform intervals to
allow for TDEV calculation.
Collected timing data is analyzed to compute the timing uncertainty, TDEV. Using TDEV,
and measured values for the nominal drift and temperature coefficient, the guard time can
be modeled. From the guard time estimations, the current consumption can be assessed
and compared between the oscillators. From the current consumption results, the con-
clusion can be made which oscillator is better suited for the project. The oscillators are
compared based on the following criteria:
• Nominal oscillator drift over time
• Sensitivity to temperature variation
• Energy consumption with respect to guard time, system awake current consumption
and resynchronization intervals
• Guard time durations.
• Cost-effectiveness
With energy consumption and cost-effectiveness being the most important criteria. From
these criteria the benchmark results provide a clear basis for the selection of the oscillator
that balances performance, energy efficiency and cost for the ArcLoRaM network nodes.
3.1
System Architecture
The system to implement in this work is a benchmarking platform intended for the charac-
terization of oscillator performance. Internal oscillator, using an on-board crystal oscillator
provided by a microcontroller and an external oscillator module. Because the character-
istics of the internal oscillator depend on the specific microcontroller, the choice directly
affects the measurement setup. In order to support the required measurements, the mi-
crocontroller must satisfy the following requirements:
• It must interface with both oscillators simultaneously without degrading their perfor-
mance
• It must be able to interface with a high-stability clock reference to compare the os-
cillators under test
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
15
==PAGE:24==
• It must be capable of logging measurements to an SD card for offline analysis
• It must offer a decent development framework in order to reduce development time
Because the purpose of this specific setup is purely to measure oscillator behaviour, power
efficiency is not an important design factor. A custom PCB was not developed at this
stage. Producing a PCB was considered premature and would have introduced additional
cost, development time and the risk of design repetitions if issues are encountered. This
was all incompatible with the tight project schedule. Therefore, the initial implementation
was built on a breadboard which allowed for flexibility and quick iterations. While a PCB
would certainly improve robustness, reduce parasitic capacitances and result in more
reliable measurements, the current setup serves more as a proof of concept. Future
development of this research should use a carefully designed dedicated PCB.
3.1.1
Microcontroller Selection
A wide range of microcontrollers can support the previously listed requirements crite-
ria. The most common options for microcontrollers are the STM32 and ESP32 families.
STM32 devices provide a large catalog of devices optimized for cost, performance and
power consumption. Many STM32 models include internal oscillators, low-frequency ex-
ternal crystal support and multiple communication interfaces which meet the criteria for
this setup. The STM32F0 series, for example, would have been a cost-effective choice.
It features low power RC oscillators, support for external 32.768 kHz crystals, and suffi-
cient peripheral interfaces [19]. Alternatively, the ESP32 family provides similar support
and benefits from a more accessible software ecosystem [20]. Its ESP-IDF framework is
very well documented and brings a balance between professional and hobbyist develop-
ment. Given that both platforms meet the technical requirements with not much separating
between them, the ESP32 ended up being selected as the microcontroller for this bench-
marking setup because of its availability in the laboratory used and the author’s familiarity
with its development framework, and in turn reducing development time.
The ESP32’s main crystal oscillator typically achieves an accuracy of ±10 ppm and is ac-
tive during active and modem-sleep modes. During light-sleep and deep-sleep modes, the
ESP32 switches to its internal RC oscillator which runs by default at 150 kHz consuming 5
µA. This RC frequency can be tuned up to 17.5 MHz at the expense of approximately 5 µA
additional current consumption. For accurate long-term timekeeping, an external 32.768
kHz is recommended by the microcontroller’s manufacturers. Adding an external crystal
results in an additional 1 µA current consumption resulting in a total current consumption
of 6 µA.[20]
3.1.2
Internal Oscillator Selection
From Section 3.1.1 it is clear that the most optimal selection for the internal oscillator is
the one using an external 32.768 kHz crystal. Because the setup would be implemented
on a breadboard, a through-hole (THT) crystal was required. A suitable low-ppm option
was found from Wurth Elektronik [21], rated at:
• 15 ppm initial accuracy
• 5 ppm/year aging
• -40 ◦C to +85 ◦C operating range
A 15 ppm drift deviation corresponds to approximately 15 µs per second or 1.286 seconds
per day with additional drift introduced by temperature and aging. Breadboard parasitic
capacitances can further degrade stability. To mitigate this, the crystal was soldered to
the ESP32 pins during measurement with 12.5 pF load capacitors following the datasheet
16
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:25==
recommendations. A finalized PCB implementation using an SMD crystal with proper
grounding, guard rings and minimized trace length would offer substantially improved
stability. The results obtained from this benchmark can therefore be viewed as worst-
case scenario performance.
At 32.768 kHz, the oscillator’s period is
T =
1
32, 768 = 30.52µs
which means that each timer tick advances by 30.52 µs. Microsecond-level resolution can-
not be obtained directly from this clock. However, sub-tick resolution can be estimated
through running averaging techniques and smoothing algorithms. This is discussed fur-
ther in the implementation section.
3.1.3
Clock Reference
Accurately estimating the absolute drift of different clock configurations requires a stable
clock reference. NTP was initially considered as an option. NTP is a protocol used to
organize and maintain a set of time servers and transmission paths as a synchroniza-
tion subnet providing network fetched clock reference. However, fetching clock reference
through network traffic brings non-deterministic delays on the order of milliseconds which
does not meet the timing requirements for the clock reference of the benchmark and was
therefore not considered further. [22]
GPS satellites carry multiple atomic clocks synchronized with one another and are con-
tinuously monitored and corrected by ground stations that also use atomic clocks, which
provides nanosecond-level accuracy [23]. GPS receivers pick up signals from multiple
satellites, solve for its position, correct delays caused by travel time, ionospheric and tro-
pospheric delays and relativistic effects. Through this process they can align their internal
timebase to the GPS system time [24]. GPS time is theoretically accurate to approxi-
mately 14 nanoseconds due to the clock drift relative to the International Atomic Time that
the atomic clocks in GPS transmitters experience [25]. In practice, GPS receivers lose
some accuracy in interpreting the signals and are therefore typically accurate to around
100 nanoseconds [26] [27]. Once the receiver has locked to GPS time, it generates a
Pulse Per Second (PPS) signal, with the rising edge aligned to the start of a UTC sec-
ond. The PPS signal is produced by the receiver’s onboard oscillator which introduces its
own clock drift. However, this oscillator is continuously corrected by comparison with the
atomic-clock-referenced satellite time.
For the experimental setup, a u-blox NEO-7N GPS receiver was used to provide a PPS
signal to be used for clock reference [28]. Absolute time-of-day information was obtained
through the non-time-critical GPRMC message of the NMEA sentences. Combining these
two elements would provide the clock reference with an anchor in current time-of-day with
precise elapsed time info. To minimize software delays, the PPS edges were captured
through hardware using the ESP32’s MCPWM peripheral running at 80 MHz. This config-
uration would provide a robust reference clock with sub-microsecond resolution, meeting
the requirements of the benchmark.
3.1.4
External Oscillator Selection
The choice of an external oscillator was more straightforward: a temperature-compensated
crystal oscillator (TCXO) offered the best balance between stability, availability and cost
as discussed in Section 2.2. The DS3231 is a widely used TCXO that provides a stability of
approximately 3.5 ppm and includes useful features such as I2C interface, programmable
alarms, and a battery-backup system that preserves timekeeping during power interrup-
tions. The DS3231 was therefore deemed a good fit for the benchmarking setup and was
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
17
==PAGE:26==
selected. [29] Although the DS3231 allows timekeeping to be done through I2C, this in-
terface can however add unpredictable latency. To minimize timing uncertainty caused by
I2C communication, the experiment used the DS3231’s 1 Hz square-wave output (SQW
pin) as the external timing reference. This signal was captured using a hardware PWM
timer derived from the 80 MHz system clock, giving a timestamp resolution of 12.5 ns.
Because the SQW pin only toggles once per second, microsecond-level resolutoin was
obtained by interpolating the number of PWM timer ticks occuring between SQW edges.
One limitation of this approach is that the system timer itself drifts by roughly 10 ppm.
Over one second, this can contribute up to about 10 µs of additional timing error.
3.1.5
SD Card
An SD card reader was integrated into the measurement setup to allow data to be stored
during measurements. Logging data directly to the SD card allows the system of per-
form long-duration measurements without requiring a constant connection to a computer.
This makes the setup more autonomous, reduces the need for continuous overshight and
makes general data processing and analysis simpler.
3.1.6
Setup Overview
The setup was created to test three instances of each oscillator, using the same GPS
reference across each device for stability. Each instance was created to be identical to
one another, to create a fair comparison across the devices. The benchmarking setup is
portrayed in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Benchmarking setup
3.2
System Implementation
The measurement system was designed to measure oscillator stability for both the internal
and external oscillator by comparing against a GPS reference. The GPS module outputs
a pulse-per-second (PPS) signal which is used as the true timing signal. Each PPS rising
edge was timestamped using the microcontroller’s MCPWM capture unit. The MCPWM
peripheral operates from the main system clock which can be configured up to 240 MHz,
18
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:27==
corresponding to a timestamp resolution of 4.17 nanoseconds. The same MCPWM cap-
ture mechanism was used to timestamp and interpolate the 1 Hz square-wave output
(SQW) from the DS3231 TCXO module. Since both PPS and SQW edges are measured
using the same hardware timer and clock source, their phase relationship caused by the
PWM sampling cancels out. In contrast, the microcontroller’s internal 32.768 kHz crystal
oscillator can only be measured through its built in RTC counter. This counter increments
at the crystal’s frequency and therefore gives a fixed step size of 30.5 microseconds per
tick. Because the RTC does not support high-resolution capture against the system clock,
this limits the granularity of the timestamps for the internal oscillator. Under stable con-
ditions, the drift of the internal oscillator can therefore be seen as flat, as it takes a drift
over the step size to force a value change. To log measurement data over long durations,
an SD card interface was integrated into the system. Timestamps from all oscillators in-
cluding the GPS PPS, DS3231 SQW and the internal oscillator were recorded directly
to the SD card. The firmware was structured around hardware-interruptödriven capture
events rather than software-based interrupts as software ones can introduce unnecessary
latency and jitter. Each rising edge on the PPS and SQW input pins triggered an MCPWM
capture interrupt, during which the current value of the 240 MHz timer was latched and
stored in a buffer. For the internal oscillator, the RTC counter was sampled in sync with
the PPS interrupt. To make sure that accurate alignment takes place and avoid RTOS
scheduling delays, this sampling was performed within a dedicated high-priority task. This
data was then flushed to the SD card at a one minute interval. The firmware source code
is available in the ArcLoRaM GitHub repository [30].
3.3
Measurement Procedure
Measurements are organized into baseline measurements and temperature-stress mea-
surements (further referred to simply as temperature measurements). The baseline mea-
surements characterize oscillator performance under stable conditions defined as room-
temperature conditions in a DTU office environment, with only minor temperature fluctu-
ations typical of a normal indoor workspace. The temperature measurements involve an
environment chamber where temeprature conditions were manipulated in order to eval-
uate the oscilattors’ sensitivity and response to thermal changes. A climate chamber,
shown in Figure 3.2, located at DTU premises was used for this purpose.
Across both measurement categories, multiple benchmarks were conducted to build a
comprehensive performance profile of each oscillator.
During all benchmarks, offset,
drift, and temperature were recorded. These primary metrics enabled further analysis,
including temperature-drift correlation, Allan deviation, and statistical metrics such as:
• Temperature coefficient, αT : The slope of the temperature-drift correlation curve.
• Correlation coefficient, r-value: Indicator for the strength and direction of a linear
relationship.
• p-value: Indicator for the probability that the observed correlation occurs by chance.
For the baseline category, measurements began with the default RC oscillator of the
ESP32, followed by benchmarks using the internal oscillator with an external 32.768 kHz
crystal. The same configuration was then tested again with static-compensation applied
to reduce the linear drift. The algorithm samples the initial drift values for a certain amount
of calibration time, and subtracts this average from subsequent drift measurements. This
method effectively removes the linear component of the drift at no additional hardware
cost. The pseudo-code for the algortithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Following the baseline characterization, temperature measurements were performed. These
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: WK3-340/40 climate chamber setup used for temperature measurements.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code for Linear Drift Compensation Algorithm
1: Sample initial drift values: initial_samples = get_initial_drift_samples(N)
2: Compute average drift: average_drift = - initial_samples/N
3: for each new_sample in drift_measurements do
4:
compensated_sample = new_sample −average_drift
5:
Store compensated_sample
6: end for
began with a Greenland diurnal temperature benchmark, in which the climate chamber
was used to simulate realistic Arctic temperature cycles. The temperature profile was de-
rived from weather-station data from the Greenland Climate Network (GC-Net). GC-Net
was established in 1995 by Prof. Konrad Steffen at CIRES to study the climatology of the
Greenland ice sheet. The program was funded by the USA until Denmark took over re-
sponsibility for its operation and maintenance in the year 2020 [31]. Because the research
team plans future deployement testing of the protocol in Sisimiut, temperature data from
a nearby station were preferred. The available GC-Net network of wather stations are
shown in Figure 3.3. Each station is labeled using a three-letter regional identifier followed
by a single letter that distinguishes stations within the same region. Among these, the KAN
stations (highlighted in the d focus box in Figure 3.3) are the closest to Sisimiut. Of the five
KAN stations, four are located on the ice sheet, while only one, KAN-B, is situated on land.
Since the planned field deployment will occur on land rather than on the glacier, KAN-B
was selected as the source of temperature data for constructing the diurnal temperature
benchmark. After the diurnal temperature benchmark, a temperature-gradient variation
measurement was conducted. This measurement examined the behaviour of the oscilla-
tors under controlled temperature changes with varying rates of increase and decrease.
The purpose was to evaluate how different temperature gradients influence oscillator drift
and other performance characteristics. The climate chamber was programmed to cycle
20
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Location of GC-Net weather stations in Greenland
between −10◦and +10◦, with the duration of each temperature transition progressively
reduced: first 4 hours, then 2 hours, then 1 hour, and finally 30 minutes. Finally, an
extreme temperature-swing measurement was performed, in which the oscillators were
subjected to a large thermal excursion ranging from −30◦to +10◦, repeated in a square-
wave pattern. The transition period between the two temperature setpoints was fixed at
30 minutes, resulting in a very high temeprature rate of change intended to stress the
oscillators and reveal worst-case drift behaviour.
Current consumption measurements were also conducted on the external oscillator to pro-
vide a basis for comparison with the internal oscillator. The Power Profiler Kit II (PPK2)
from Nordic Semiconductors was used for this purpose. These measurements are impor-
tant for evaluating the trade-offs between oscillator stability and energy efficiency, partic-
ularly in scenarios where longer guard times may increase the system’s overall energy
consumption.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
21
==PAGE:30==
3.3.1
Limitations
The temperature measurements provided insight into how the oscillators behave under
varying thermal conditions. However, access to the climate chamber was limited, as it
was continuously in use by Ph.D. students and other faculty members with higher priority.
Consequently, the chamber was available for only a single weekend during the measure-
ment period. Because of these time constraints, the measurements presented here are
the entire temperature-dependent measurements that could be completed. A compre-
hensive temperature-profile characterization, where the oscillators would be tested over
a large temperature range to see the how the temperature coefficient changes with re-
spect to different absolute temperature ratings, had originally been planned but could not
be carried out. Similarly, the extreme temperature-swing measurement was intended to
be repeated, since system failures in some devices occurred during its initial execution,
but this was not possible given the restricted chamber availability.
Power supply fluctuations test was initially intended to be performed but it was discovered
too late that the development board that was being used in the benchmarking setup had
an LDO power regulator, which is highly susceptible to power supply fluctuations. This
would likely have influenced the results too much, making the measurement unreliable,
and was therefore skipped. This would, however, be an interesting measurement that
could be performed in the future with a properly designed power supply scheme.
Current consumption measurements on the internal oscillator could not be performed
within the available time due to complications with the development board hardware. The
measured currents consistently remained at a few mA even when the device was set to
deep sleep. Hardware components such as LEDs, the UART bridge, and the voltage reg-
ulator were soldered off, which reduced the current to approximately 1 mA, yet this is still
significantly higher than the datasheet specification of 6 µA. As a result, for calculations
with the current consumption of the internal oscillator, the datasheet value of 6 µA was
used.
As previously noted, the measurement setup is also affected by degraded parasitic ca-
pacitances due to the use of a breadboard. In a more mature setup, a custom PCB with
careful layout design would be designed in order to minimize parasitic effects and improve
measurement accuracy.
22
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:31==
4
Measurements
4.1
Baseline Measurements
The baseline measurements characterize oscillator performance under stable conditions
defined as room-temperature conditions in a DTU office environment, with only minor
temperature fluctuations typical of a normal indoor workspace.
4.1.1
Default RC Oscillator Measurement
A benchmark of the internal oscillator using the default RC oscillator was conducted to
evaluate its accuracy and provide a numerical basis for evaluating performance improve-
ment achieved by using an external 32.768 kHz crystal.
Results
Figure 4.1 highlights the offset change of the oscillators with respect to the GPS reference
oscillator. The left plot presents the offset of the internal oscillators, the middle plot shows
the offset of the external oscillators and the right plot displays the temperature measured
throughout the benchmark. The temperature was recorded using the onboard tempera-
ture sensors on the three external oscillators used in the setup.
Figure 4.1: Offsets of the internal oscillators and external oscillators along with recorded
temeperature.
Figure 4.2 highlights the drift change of the internal oscillators. Drift is defined as the
derivative of the offset, the units for drift are expressed in ppm, meaning that each data
point represents how many microseconds of deviation from the GPS reference accumu-
lates every second. As covered in Chapter 3, three devices were measured. Accordingly,
each subplot in Figure 4.2 displays the drift of the internal oscillator corresponding to each
of the three devices. Similarly, Figure 4.3 highlights the drift change of the external oscil-
Figure 4.2: Drift of the internal oscillator using the default RC oscillator across three de-
vices
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
23
==PAGE:32==
lators.
Figure 4.3: Drift of external oscillator across the three devices
A summary of key results is provided in Table 4.1, showing the offset and drift change for
both the internal and external oscillators for each of the three devices over the duration of
the entire benchmark. The table also includes averaged values across the three devices
for both metrics, allowing for a clearer comparison between the two oscillator types. It
should be emphasized that the table only shows the end-to-end averages. As a result,
the offset and drift values represent long-term means that may mask significant shorter-
term variations. For an accurate picture of oscillator behaviour, the table must be read as
a supplement with the graphs, which show how the offsets and drifts evolve over time.
Table 4.1: Measured offset and drift of internal and external oscillators over a duration of
69,720 seconds.
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Offset [ms]
219,002.959
215,919.777
276,888.016
40.998
40.785
19.820
Average Offset [ms]
-237,270.251
33.868
Drift [ppm]1
-3141.18
-3096.96
-3971.43
0.58
0.58
0.28
Average Drift [ppm]
-3403
0.486
Discussion
For this benchmark it is evident that the performance of the internal oscillator using the
default RC oscillator is inadequate. A drift of 3403 ppm, as highlighted on Table 4.1,
corresponds to approximately 3.4 ms deviation per second, which is unacceptable for this
protocol that has critical synchronization concerns. No sensible resynchronization interval
could be used with this amount of drift. In addition to this poor performance, the drift
fluctuation is significant. Comparing the temperature subplot in Figure 4.1 with the drift
plot in Figure 4.2 reveals an almost one-to-one correlation, with the drift closely following
the temperature changes. The performance could likely be improved through calibration
or compensation, but such efforts seem unnecessary given that the use of an external
32.768 kHz crystal connected to the internal oscillator provides a substantial improvement
at a minimal cost and energy expenditure as explored in Section 3.1.1.
1Drift values are computed as the per-device total offset divided by the total duration and can therefore
be viewed as the average per-device drift.
24
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:33==
4.1.2
Internal Oscillator using External Crystal Measurement
A benchmark of the internal oscillator using an external 32.768 kHz crystal was conducted
to evaluate the accuracy improvement over the default RC oscillator and to compare with
the external oscillator. The measurement was conducted over a weekend with a duration
of approximately 67 hours.
Results
Figure 4.4 presents the offset of each oscillator relative to the GPS reference, where the
left subplot shows the offset of the internal oscillators, the middle subplot, and the right
subplot displays the temperature profile recorded during the measurement. Figure 4.5
illustrates the drift behaviour of the internal oscillators, while Figure 4.6 shows the cor-
responding drift behaviour of the external oscillators. A summary of the key numerical
results is provided in Table 4.2, which lists the offset and drift changes for both the inter-
nal and external oscillators across all three devices.
Figure 4.4: Offsets of the internal oscillators and external oscillators along with recorded
temeperature.
Figure 4.5: Drift of the internal oscillator using an external 32.768 kHz crystal across three
devices.
Figure 4.6: Drift of the external oscillator across three devices.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.2: Measured offset and drift of internal and external oscillators over a duration of
244,920 seconds.
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Offset [ms]
-6,628.966
-7,240.186
-4,808.324
151.284
145.687
74.193
Average Offset [ms]
-6,225.825
123.721
Drift [ppm]
-27.066
-29.561
-19.632
0.618
0.595
0.303
Average Drift [ppm]
-25.420
0.505
Discussion
Table 4.2 shows substantial improvements in performance with 32.768 kHz crystal equipped
internal oscillator over the default RC oscillator option. The average offsets for the two
configurations,
DriftRC = −3403 ppm,
DriftXTAL = −25.420 ppm,
indicate an improvement of approximately 3378 ppm in timing accuracy. In practical terms,
the internal oscillator with the external crystal drifts by roughly 1.5 ms per minute, whereas
the RC-based oscillator drifts by approximately 204 ms per minute under the same con-
ditions. This large reduction in timing error supports the use of the internal oscillator with
an external 32.768 kHz crystal as the standard configuration in the analysis. Comparing
now the improved internal oscillator with the external oscillator,
Driftint = −25.420 ppm,
Driftext = 0.505 ppm,
shows that the external oscillator still drastically outperforms the internal oscillator, approx-
imately 50 times better. As shown in Figure 4.4, the offsets for both oscillators demon-
strate a really linear behaviour even under fluctuating temperature conditions. Figure 4.5
shows how the internal oscillator reacts to the slow temperature fluctuations.
These
temperature-induced variations in the drift are not visible in Figure 4.4 as the linear drift
component dominates overwhelmingly. Interesting detail is that some of the internal os-
cillators show more reaction to fluctuating temperature than others. For example with
device 3 compared to devices 1 and 2, the temperature-induced drift is a lot more notice-
able. The same linear factor can be seen for the external oscillator in 4.4 but Figure 4.6
does not have visible temperature-induced variations in the drift but what largely seems to
be stable noise, indicating that the temperature compensation in the module is working.
This linear factor seems to vary between oscillators, with device 3 outperforming devices
1 and 2. This is worth further examination, whether the underlying cause is system-related
or attributable to manufacturing variation in the oscillators themselves.
26
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:35==
4.1.3
Cross-Testing Measurement
To investigate whether the linear drift factor is caused by a system-based issue or man-
ufacturing variation, a comparative test was performed. The 32.768 kHz crystal and the
external oscillator modules of devices 2 and 3 were swapped to assess whether the per-
formance difference was due to the components or the devices themselves. If the perfor-
mance stays the same, that would indicate a system-based issue and further examination
would be needed of potential influences such as the breadboard, passive components or
wiring. For the measurement, all other conditions were left unchanged.
Results
Figure 4.7 highlights the offset change of the oscillators with respect to the GPS reference
oscillator with the left plot representing the offset of the internal oscillators, the middle plot
showing the offset of the external oscillators and the right plot displaying the temperature
measured throughout the benchmark. Figure 4.8 highlights the drift change of the internal
oscillators while Figure 4.9 highlights the drift change of the external oscillators. A sum-
mary of key results is provided in Table 4.3, showing the offset and drift change for both
the internal and external oscillators for each of the three devices.
Figure 4.7: Offsets of the internal oscillators and external oscillators along with recorded
temperature.
Figure 4.8: Drift of the internal oscillator across three devices, with the external 32.768 kHz
crystals of devices 2 and 3 switched.
Discussion
Figure 4.8 shows that device 3 continues to have lower drift than the other devices, with
a drift of around 20 ppm compared to the other devices’ ≥28 ppm. This indicates that
its improved performance is not due to the crystal itself but rather to more favourable op-
erating conditions provided by the surrounding system. As the surrounding system for
1Drift values are computed as the per-device total offset divided by the total duration and can therefore
be viewed as the average per-device drift.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: Drift of the external oscillator across three devices, with the external oscillator
modules of devices 2 and 3 switched.
Table 4.3: Measured offset and drift of internal and external oscillators over a duration of
82,140 seconds.
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Total Offset [ms]
-2,294.555
-2,546.268
-1,674.707
47.073
22.449
47.538
Average Offset [ms]
-2,171.842
39.020
Drift [ppm]1
-27.935
-30.999
-20.388
0.573
0.273
0.579
Average Drift [ppm]
-26.441
0.475
each device is identical, and experiment was re-ran with different auxiliary components
and wiring, the most plausible explanation is that the difference can be traced to a vari-
ation between the microcontrollers themselves. It could be that the ESP32 on device
3 is less aged or benefitted from better soldering quality during manufacturing. As dis-
cussed earlier, soldering conditions and reflow processes can have a measurable impact
on oscillator performance. In Figure 4.9, after swapping the external oscillator modules
between devices 2 and 3, device 2 becomes the best performer. This shift demonstrates
that the dominant source of performance variation in this case originates from the external
oscillator module rather than from the system. Since the modules are assumed to have
been manufactured using identical process and were unused prior to testing, manufac-
turing variation between the oscillator units is the most plausible explanation. What these
results then indicate is that it is very important to evaluate each device/system prior to
deployment to identify any manufacturing-related discrepancies or aging effects that may
influence oscillator stability. These variations may furthermore also impact temperature
sensitivity.
28
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:37==
4.1.4
Static-Compensation Measurement
Static-compensation was applied with the goal of mitigating the linear component in the
oscillator drifts. The linear component can be removed through a software-based algo-
rithm at no additional cost by sampling the initial drift values, computing their average, and
subtracting this average from subsequent drift samples. A pseudo-code, further detailing
this algorithm, is provided in Appendix. For this measurement, the calibration period was
set to 10 minutes. In theory, extending the calibration time should yield a more accurate
estimate of the linear component and thereby further improve compensation accuracy.
After applying the compensation algorithm, the system was benchmarked through a week-
long continuous measurement to assess the long-term behaviour of the oscillators and to
quantify the improvement in overall stability.
Results
Figure 4.10 presents the offset of each oscillator relative to the GPS reference. The left
plot shows the offset of the internal oscillator, the middle plot shows the offset of the ex-
ternal oscillator, and the right plot shows the recorded temperature over the duration of
the measurement. Figure 4.11 illustrates the drift behaviour of the internal oscillator, while
Figure 4.12 shows the corresponding drift behaviour of the external oscillator. A summary
of key results is provided in Table 4.4, which lists the offset and drift change for both the
internal and external oscillators across all three devices. Temperature correlation metrics
were also derived from the dataset. Figure4.13 shows the temperature-drift correlation
for the internal oscillators and Figure 4.14 shows the corresponding relationship for the
external oscillators. Each graph includes key correlation metrics: the temperature coeffi-
cient, indicating how much the drift changes with respect to temperature, the correlation
coefficient r which quantifies the strength of the relationship and the p-value, indicating
the statistical significance. These metrics are further emphasized in Table 4.5.
Figure 4.10: Offsets of the static-compensated internal and external oscillators along with
recorded temperature.
Figure 4.11: Drift change of the static-compensated internal oscillators across three de-
vices.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.12: Drift change of the static-compensated external oscillators across three de-
vices.
Table 4.4: Measured offset and drift of internal and external oscillators over a duration of
596,940 seconds which is rougly one week.
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Offset [ms]
14.377
141.989
2.586
13.379
9.052
-23.989
Average Offset [ms]
52.984
-0.519
Drift [ppm]
0.0241
0.238
0.004
0.022
0.015
-0.040
Average Drift [ppm]
0.089
-0.001
Figure 4.13: Temperature to drift correlation of static-compensated internal oscillators,
across three devices.
Discussion
Clear improvements in oscillator performance are observed after applying compensation,
particularly for the internal oscillator, which now displays an average drift of only 0.089 ppm
across the three devices. Observing the individual internal oscillator drift, highlighted in
Table 4.4 and graphed in Figure 4.11, the drift amount seems to vary a lot:
Driftint,device-1 = 0.0241 ppm,
Driftint,device-2 = 0.238 ppm,
Driftint,device-3 = 0.004 ppm.
It is believed that after the linear factor has been mitigated, the temperature-induced ef-
fects are now much more pronounced. The assumption was made earlier that temperature-
induced effects vary depending on the device’s temperature susceptibility. This assump-
tion is supported by the results from the temperature-drift correlation data in Figure 4.13
which show that each different oscillator exhibit different levels of sensitivity to temperature
30
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.14: Temperature to drift correlation of static-compensated external oscillators,
across three devices.
Table 4.5: Statisical metrics of temperature correlation with sample size n = 1213
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Slope, αT [ppm
◦C ]
-0.156
-0.239
-0.077
0.006
0.003
0.007
r-value
-0.327
-0.560
-0.189
0.212
0.120
0.306
p-value
5.9e-247
0
1.2e-80
5.5e-101
5.6e-33
9.1e-215
change. Figure 4.13 portrays the temperature-drift correlation, with Table 4.5 highlight-
ing the statistical metrics of the correlation. For the internal oscillators, the temperature
coefficients are derived as,
αT int,device-1 = −0.156 ppm,
αT int,device-2 = −0.239 ppm,
αT int,device-3 = −0.077 ppm,
which supports the claim that there are different levels of temperature-sensitivity between
the devices. The varying r-value, which indicates the strength of a relationship between
the two variables, also supports this claim. Device 2 shows much stronger temperature
sensitivity compared to the other devices and this is furthermore demonstrated in its off-
set data in Figure 4.10 where it experiences a lot more total offset over the duration. This
demonstrates how much effect the higher temperature-sensitivity has on the overall oscil-
lator performance even when operating in relatively stable temperature conditions. These
effects are believed to be caused by manufacturing variation or aging effects which seem
to be the primary difference maker in performance across identical devices.
The external oscillators showcase varying drift as well but to a much lesser degree as ex-
pected. The variations are less spread, and when averaged out across the three devices
almost cancel each other out with an average drift of only −0.001 ppm. This is believed to
be because of more robust manufacturing and tolerance acceptances for the dedicated
external oscillator module. The statistical significance of all of the oscillators’ temperature
correlation is quantified by the significance probability (p-value) in Table 4.5. This mea-
sure indicates the likelihood that the observed relationship could have arisen by chance.
These values are all near-zero and therefore support the correlation assessment.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Temperature Measurements
The temperature measurements characterize oscillator performance under fluctuating
temperature conditions using a climate chamber located at DTU premises were per-
formed.
4.2.1
Greenland Diurnal Temperature Variation Benchmark
An experiment was conducted to simulate realistic Arcitc temperature cycles. The tem-
perature profile was derived from weather-station data from GC-Net and conducted over
20 hours.
Results
Figure 4.15 shows the offset progression for both the internal and external oscillators
alongside the recorded temperature. Figure 4.16 presents the drift of the internal oscil-
lators across the three devices, while Figure 4.17 shows the corresponding drift for the
external oscillators. Table 4.6 summarizes the end-to-end offset and drift change for each
device, as well as the average value for each oscillator type over the duration of the mea-
surement. Additionally, temperature correlation was derived from the data. Here, the
averaged line through the data points ignore the rapid temperature decrease during the
initial phases of the experiment where it reaches the starting point for the temperature as it
is not the focus of this experiment. Figure 4.18 highlights the temperature-drift correlation
of the internal oscillators used in the system while Figure 4.19 highlights the temperature-
drift correlation of the external oscillators. Each graph includes key correlation metrics:
the slope, indicating how much the drift changes with respect to temperature (expressed
in ppm
◦C ), the correlation coefficient r which quanitifies the strength of the relationship, the
p-value, indicating statistical significance, and the sample size n. These statistical metrics
are further emphasized in Table 4.7.
Figure 4.15: Offsets of the internal and external oscillators along with recorded tempera-
ture
Figure 4.16: Drift of the internal oscillators across three devices.
32
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.17: Drift of the external oscillators across three devices.
Table 4.6: Measured offset and drift of internal and external oscillators over a duration of
596,940 seconds which is rougly one week.
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Offset [ms]
3,864.075
3,965.135
4,011.963
162.285
50.331
-36.099
Average Offset [ms]
3,946.724
58.839
Drift [ppm]
53.079
54.481
55.125
2.230
0.692
-0.496
Average Drift [ppm]
54.228
0.808
Figure 4.18: Temperature-drift correlation of internal oscillators across three devices.
Figure 4.19: Temperature-drift correlation of external oscillators across three devices.
Table 4.7: Statisical metrics of temperature correlation with sample size n = 1213
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Slope, αT [ppm
◦C ]
-2.785
-2.858
-2.851
-0.001
-0.017
0.004
r-value
-0.997
-0.998
-0.998
-0.017
-0.309
0.073
p-value
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.4e-99
1.2e-74
3.5e-64
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
33
==PAGE:42==
Discussion
Comparing the temperature profile in Figure 4.15 with the internal oscillator drift across the
three devices in Figure 4.16 shows a strong temeprature-drift relationship. As the temper-
ature decreases, the drift increases and as the temperature rises, the drift increases. This
temperature-drift correlation is consistent with earlier measurements and is now confirmed
to persist under more extreme temperature conditions. The temperature correlation plots
in Figure 4.18 further illustrate this relationship. A running-average fit yields an approx-
imately linear slope across the benchmarked temperature range. Temperatures prior to
the official measurement range are omitted from the fitted line but can still be seen in the
correlation plots where they show a bit of curving of the correlation. This non-linear be-
haviour, however, is across a 40 degree temperature range. It can therefore be assumed
that within a somewhat reasonable temperature range, as the diurnal temperature mea-
surement uses, that the relationship is linear. As expected for the relationship, the internal
oscillators exhibit a much steeper temperature coefficient, αT across all oscillators as can
be seen in Table 4.7. Their correlation coefficients are also significantly higher, with each
oscillator showing r ≈−0.99 compared with the results from Section 4.1.4 where the
correlation coefficients ranged between −0.189 and −0.560.
These findings suggest that differences in temperature sensitivity between oscillators may
hold only up to a certain point, possibly due to an effect of temperature-drift-inertia, until the
temperature variations become so strong that it overruns this initial inertia. That is, slow
temperature changes (e.g. 0.5 ◦C per hour) affect some oscillators more strongly than
others, whereas larger gradients (3 −4 ◦C per hour) ignite a somewhat similar response
across devices. This may indicate that not only does the absolute temperature play a part
in oscillator drift but also the rate at which it changes.
This gradient sensitivity is also observed in the external oscillators, but with an almost op-
posite behaviour. During the initial phase of the test, as the climate chamber rapidly settled
to the starting temperature, a large 40 ◦C change occurred. From that point onward, the
external oscillators exhibited a persistent linear drift component, visible in Figure 4.16 but
perhaps more visibly in the accumulated offset shown in Figure 4.15. The temperature-
drift correlation in Figure 4.19 further illustrates this, with the decreasing temperature the
data points trend upward in drift, then abruptly shift to a compensated level. However,
this compensated level is either overshot or undershot depending on the device, leading
to a residual drift that persists throughout the measurement. These observations suggest
that large temperature gradients can momentarily overwhelm or destabilize the oscillator’s
internal compensation control loop, leading to a long-term compromise in its performance.
To summarize, the findings indicate that slow temperature gradients may affect the intrin-
sic temperature-drift behaviour varyingly between oscillators due to a potential temperature-
drift-inertia phenomena, whereas faster gradients are more likely to affect temperature-
compensated oscillator due to its effect on the compensation control mechanisms.
34
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:43==
4.2.2
Temperature Gradients Benchmark
An experiment was conducted to test the oscillators in different gradients to further assess
the relationship between drift and the rate of change of temperature, and potentially pro-
vide further evidence for the temperature-drift inertia. This measurement would also shed
light on the possibility of applying a temperature compensation algorithm. Temperature
was set to fluctuate between −10◦and 10◦, with different time given for switching between
those temperatures, from 4 hours to 30 minutes.
Results
Figure 4.20 illustrates the offset behaviour of both the internal and external oscillators to-
gether the measured temperature. Figure 4.21 presents the drift progression of the inter-
nal oscillators across the three tested devices, while Figure 4.22 shows the corresponding
drift progression for the external oscillators. Figure 4.23 illustrates the temperature-drift
correlation for the internal oscillators, and Figure 4.24 provides the same analysis for the
external oscillators. Each correlation plot includes key statistical metrics, which are further
summarized in Table 4.8.
Figure 4.20: Offsets of the internal oscillators and external oscillators along with recorded
temperature.
Figure 4.21: Drift of the internal oscillators across three devies.
Figure 4.22: Drift of the external oscillators across three devices.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.23: Temperature-drift correlation of internal oscillators.
Figure 4.24: Temperature-drift correlation of external oscillators.
Table 4.8: Statistical metrics of temperature correlation
Internal Oscillator
External Oscillator
Device
1
2
3
1
2
3
Slope, αT [ppm
◦C ]
-1.617
-1.750
-1.775
-0.038
-0.039
0.024
r-value 1
-0.992
-0.993
-0.995
-0.222
-0.427
0.514
p-value 2
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.7e-14
1.8e-48
3.3e-74
Discussion
Observing the drift of the internal oscillators in Figure 4.21 with respect to the temperature
plot in Figure 4.20 the linearity of the temperature-drift correlation seems to hold across
all of the varying gradients. This is further emphasized in the temperature-drift correlation
portrayed in Figure 4.23 where the relationship upholds throughout all of the different gra-
dients. Therefore it can be inferred that the magnitude of the gradient does not deviate
the linearity of the relationship between drift and temperature but, if anything, seems to
enhance it. Observing the strength of the relationship for the internal oscillator, denoted
by the r-value in Table 4.8, has increased by 2 percentage points from the diurnal mea-
surement in Section 4.2.1 to r ≈−99.4%. This makes sense intuitively as temperature-
induced drift factor should be more dominant in a measurement with more pronounced
temperature gradients. The linearity of the relationship across gradients within this tem-
perature range indicates the potential of a simple temperature compensating algorithm
that only needs to take into account the difference between temperature values and not the
speed at which the temperature changes. A comprehensive temperature profile across
wide range of temperatures would need to be performed to derive the temperature coeffi-
1r-value measures the strength and direction of a linear relationship between two variables.
2p-value signifies the probability that the observed result occurred by chance.
36
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:45==
cient as it does seem to vary across absolute temperatures. The temperature coefficients
for the diurnal measurement were:
αT int,device-1 = −1.864 ppm
◦C ,
αT int,device-2 = −1.897 ppm
◦C ,
αT int,device-3 = −1.931 ppm
◦C .
Whereas the temperature coefficients for the gradient measurement are:
αT int,device-1 = −1.617 ppm
◦C ,
αT int,device-2 = −1.755 ppm
◦C ,
αT int,device-3 = −1.773 ppm
◦C .
Indicating that the lower absolute temperature in the gradient measurement corresponds
with lower temperature coefficients. The variation between the temperature coefficients
furthermore highlight the importance that temperature compensation needs to be applied
on a per-device basis. Device 1 for example conistently has lower temperature coeffi-
cients than devices 2 and 3.
For the external oscillator, the relationship between the temperature plot and the drift can
be somewhat traced through the small waves the drift exhibits in Figure 4.22. As the tem-
perature gradient increases, the oscillators start to behave more unstable. This is more
evident with devices 1 and 2 where spikes appear that rapidly shift the offset before the
compensation algorithm can adjust. The consequence of this spiking can be observed
on the offset graph for the external oscillators in Figure 4.20, where the external oscillator
for device 2 drifts more and more with each spike. It therefore seems that the rate of
change of temperature has an increased effect on the temperature-compensated exter-
nal oscillators than for the non-temperature-compensated internal oscillators. A plausible
explanation for this is that the response time of the compensation algorithm could be
a function of the rate of change in temperature and that this response time varies be-
tween external oscillators through manufacturing tolerances. As temperature gradients
increase, the compensation algorithm attempts to track the drift and compensate. When
the temperature changes rapidly, the drift can grow faster than the algorithm can correct
for, resulting in a significant residual error for fast gradients. The variation in this response
time could also explain why the external oscillator in device 2 seems to spike more with
progressive gradients than device 3 which seems to handle the gradients better. Device 3
does show spikes at higher gradients but are far less severe. Observing the temperature-
drift correlation in Figure 4.24 reveals a noisy plot. This is believed be the cause of the
compensation algorithm and its issue with tracking fast gradients. The temperature coef-
ficients, αT , are however quite minimal, averaging at approximately ±0.04 ppm
◦C . It should
also be noted that the temperature sensor used to derive compensation values has high
tolerance, rated at ±3 ◦C, which could also contribute to the noise.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3
Power Consumption Measurement
To properly assess the comparison and trade-offs between different oscillator configura-
tions, a power consumption benchmark was performed. The Power Profiler Kit II (PPK2)
from Nordic Semiconductor was used for this purpose.
4.3.1
Results
Figure 4.25: Current consumption of external oscillator DS3231. Average current con-
sumption: 81.86 µA.
Table 4.9: Measured current peaks during operation.
Peak
Max Current [µA]
Avg. Current [µA]
Duration [ms]
P1
362.948
353.181
127.0
P2
358.868
352.903
127.0
P3
361.135
353.048
127.0
P4
362.041
352.998
126.0
4.3.2
Discussion
The current graph highlights the peaks and nominal operation. Due to the temperature
compensation operation, current consumption spikes to ≈360 µA. However, this spike
only lasts for approximately 127 ms and does not have significant impact on the over-
all current consumption of 81.86 µA. The temperature compensation occurs roughly ev-
ery 63.8 seconds by default which matches the datasheet. The current consumption is
approximately 30 µA lower than the maximum stated current consumption stated in the
datasheet [29]. Comparing with the current consumption of the internal oscillator which is
approximately 6 µA, the external oscillator consumes roughly 14 times the current!
†Average current over all peaks: 81.86 µA.
38
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:47==
5
Guard Time Simulation
Guard time was estimated by applying the analytical model derived in Chapter 2.3.3 to
the drift measurements obtained from three benchmarks. Since the static-compensated
oscillators consistently outperformed the non-compensated ones, only the compensated
data were considered for the guard time evaluation.
The following benchmarks were selected:
• The week-long room-temperature benchmark (Section 4.1.4),
• The diurnal temperature benchmark (highlighted in Section 4.2.1), and
• The gradient temperature benchmark (Section 4.2.2).
These three datasets provide complete environmental profiles for evaluating the guard
time under different operating conditions for both the internal and external oscillator. The
week-long benchmark represents a stable environment and is therefore used to com-
pute a stable guard time estimate. The diurnal benchmark reflects realistic environmental
variation expected in a Greenland deployment, yielding a realistic guard time estimate.
Finally, the gradient benchmark represents rapid and extreme temperature transitions,
and is used to obtain an extreme guard time estimate.
Following the guard time model in Section 2.3.3, the time deviation, σx(τ), for the internal
and external oscillators is derived. Figure 5.1 portrays the TDEV for the stable estimate,
Figure 5.2 portrays the TDEV for the realistic estimate, and Figure 5.3 portrays the TDEV
for the extreme estimate.
Examining the TDEV curves, the timing uncertainty generally increases approximately
linearly with the length of the resynchronization interval. An exception appears for the
internal oscillator in the stable estimate shown in Figure 5.1, where a shallow minimum
occurs at approximately τ = 540 s corresponding to an ’optimal’ resynchronization in-
verval of roughly 9 minutes. This interval is however not compatible with the intended
protocol, which relies on long sleep duration sto minimize power consumption. Using the
data derived from TDEV for each oscillator under each measurement condition, the guard
time can be derived. Applying the guard time model from Section 2.3.3, the guard time is
given by:
G(τ) = 3
√
2 · σx(τ) + |r0 + αT · ∆Θ(τ)| · 10−6 · τ
(5.1)
Here, the temperature Θ(τ) is time-dependent. This is used in order to simulate how the
guard time develops with constant temperature rate of change with the following definiton:
∆Θ(τ) = Rtemp · τ
60.
(5.2)
Where:
• G(τ) is the total guard time in seconds.
• σx(τ) is the Time Deviation (TDEV) derived from the measured data.
• 3
√
2 represents the safety factor (3σ) for combined TDEV for two independent nodes.
• r0 is the nominal frequency offset (ppm).
• α is the linear temperature coefficient (ppm/◦C).
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
39
==PAGE:48==
• ∆T(τ) is the temperature deviation as a function of the resynchronization interval τ.
• Rtemp is the rate of temperature change per hour (◦C/hour).
Figure 5.1: Stable Estimate: Time Deviation (TDEV) plots for the internal and external
oscillators
Figure 5.2: Realistic Estimate: Time Deviation (TDEV) plots for the internal and external
oscillators
Figure 5.3: Extreme Estimate: Time Deviation (TDEV) plots for the internal and external
oscillators
40
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:49==
By setting Θ(τ) to a reasonable temperature rate of change per hour, the guard time
can be plotted across all resynchronization intervals. For the stable estimate, a rate of
R = 0.5◦C/hour was used, representing a plausible slow temperature drift under con-
trolled conditions. For the realistic estimate, based on typical environmental variation in
Greenland, the rate was set to R = 1◦C/hour. For the extreme estimate, a more aggres-
sive temperature rate of change of R = 2.5◦C/hour was chosen. Figure 5.4 illustrates the
guard time behaviour across resynchronization intervals for the internal oscillator under
all three estimates, with guard times at 30-minute intervals highlighted for each estimate.
Each plot line indicates the average plotline across each oscillator device. Figure 5.5 il-
lustrates the corresponding guard time behaviour for the external oscillator.
Figure 5.4: Internal oscillator guard time estimation with respect to resynchronization in-
terval
Under stable temperature conditions, the internal oscillator exhibits excellent timing sta-
bility, maintaining sub-millisecond uncertainty over 90 minutes and increasing only to 7.2
ms over 4 hours. For the realistic and extreme estimates, the influence of temperature
becomes substantially more pronounced. Comparing the internal oscillator’s TDEV for
the realistic estimate (Figure 5.2) against the TDEV for the extreme estimate (Figure 5.3)
reveals somewhat comparable timing uncertainty behaviour across the intervals. This in-
dicates that the guard time difference can largely be traced to the tbias term which is heavily
dependant on the temperature coefficient and the rate of temperature change. The re-
sulting increase in guard time grows rapidly, almost exponentially, with longer resynchro-
nization intervals which reinforces the need for temperature compensation to optimize the
internal oscillator performance. This supports the argument for temperature compensa-
tion for the internal oscillator.
For the external oscillator guard time estimates, the extreme estimate grows much larger
than for the stable and realistic estimates. The small difference between the stable and
realistic estimate can be traced to the temperature compensation algorithm. The extreme
estimate, however, features intense gradients. As has been discussed before, these
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.5: External oscillator guard time estimation with respect to resynchronization
interval
seem to have much more effect on oscillators with temperature compensation than those
without. Further research is needed in order to fully characterize what causes this but it
is worth keeping in mind. The estimates for the external oscillator however, show much
greater stability with the extreme estimate roughly matching the stable estimate for the in-
ternal oscillator. The realistic estimate demonstrates sub-millisecond performance across
approximately 2.5 hours.
5.1
Energy Consumption
To fully contextualize the guard time results, the associated energy consumption must also
be considered. A shorter guard time reduces the duration for which the system must stay
awake, which lowers power consumption. Systems with consistently low guard times can
also operate with less frequent resynchronization intervals, which further reduces energy
usage. Although the internal oscillator draws only about 6 µA nominally compared to
the external oscillator’s 81.86 µA current consumption, the total system current during
an active guard period can be significantly higher. As a result, a long guard time may
outweigh the nominal savings achieved by selecting a more power-efficient oscillator. In
practice, the additional oscillator current becomes secondary compared to the energy
required to keep the entire system active for extended guard time periods. To quantify
this effect and compare the implications of each oscillator option, a current consumption
model is introduced.
Assuming a 24-hour period with resynchronization occurring every n minutes, the follow-
ing variables are defined:
• Isys: System awake current
• Gint: Guard time for the internal oscillator
42
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:51==
• Iint: Nominal current consumption of the internal oscillator
• Gext: Guard time for the external oscillator
• Iext: Nominal current consumption of the external oscillator
During each resynchronization event, the system must remain awake for the duration of
the guard time. Over a 24-hour period, the total number of resynchronization events is
N = 24 × 60
n
.
The daily charge consumption for the internal oscillator becomes
Qint(τ) = Isys Gint(τ) N + Iint · 86400,
(5.3)
and similarly, the daily charge consumption for the external oscillator is
Qext(τ) = Isys Gext(τ) N + Iext · 86400.
(5.4)
The first term in these expressions represent the power cost caused by the system being
awake due to guard time, factoring in the number of resynchronizations over a 24 hour
period, with n representing the resynchronization interval in minutes. The second term
represents the power cost associated with the nominal consumption of the oscillators over
the same 24-hour period. Here, Gint(τ), Gext(τ), Iint = 6 µA, and Iext = 81.86 µA are
known parameters. The overall power consumption therefore depends on two variables:
the system awake current Isys and the resynchronization interval n. By plotting equations
5.3 and 5.4 for the different estimates with respect to these two variables, the break-even
line can be determined. This line indicates the combination of resynchronization interval
and system awake current at which one oscillator type becomes more energy efficient than
the other. Figure 5.6 portrays the 3-dimensional plot for the stable guard time estimate.
Figure 5.6: Current consumption for the stable guard time estimate with respect to varying
resynchronization times n and system awake current Isys
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.7 portrays the 3-dimensional plot for the realistic guard time estimate.
Figure 5.7: Current consumption for the realistic guard time estimate with respect to vary-
ing resynchronization times n and system awake current Isys
Figure 5.8 portrays the 3-dimensional plot for the extreme guard estimate.
Figure 5.8: Current consumption for the extreme guard time estimate with respect to
varying resynchronization times n and system awake current Isys
Here, the break-even line is highlighted as a bold line that marks where the red sheet,
representing the internal oscillator, intersects the blue sheet, representing the external
44
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:53==
oscillator. The internal oscillator sheet curves with variation in the resynchronization in-
terval and system awake current. The external oscillator sheet remains flat relatively.
This is because the guard times for the external oscillator is so low that the dynamic part
in equation 5.4 becomes negligible in comparison to the nominal term, which dominates.
The nominal term is a constant, which therefore causes the sheet to appear flat. In reality
there are some minor deviations but are dwarfed relative to the variations in the internal
oscillator sheet which has a much greater dynamic term due to its larger guard times. For
greater clarity, the break-even line for each estimate is highlighted in Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9: Breakeven curve highlighting the point at which the internal oscillator and
external oscillator sheets intersect.
For Isys above the break-even line, the external oscillator is less power consuming than
the internal oscillator. Below the break-even line, the internal oscillator is less power
consuming. Observing Figure 5.9 for each estimate, the lowest Isys for each estimate
becomes:
• Stable estimate: Isys,min = 148.708A
• Realistic estimate: Isys,min = 3.022A
• Extreme estimate: Isys,min = 2.727A
In other words, the system would need to draw 148.7 A, 3.022 A, and 2.727 A, respectively,
during its awake periods for the external oscillator to consume less power overall than
the internal oscillator. These currents are far beyond the operating range of low power
embedded systems, which typically draw 100–300 m during active operation. Therefore,
across all scenarios, and even under the extreme drift assumptions, the internal oscillator
is without a question the more power efficient choice, regardless of the resynchronization
interval or guard time estimates.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:55==
6
Discussion
6.1
Oscillator Assessment
The measurement results demonstrate that the internal RC oscillator of the ESP32 is
insufficient for the protocol’s timing objectives with a drift of approximately 3403 ppm over
the test interval. This corresponds to drift of 3.4 ms every second. Switching to an external
32.768 kHz crystal significantly improves the performance, providing approximately 50-fold
reduction in drift for an increase of approximately 1 µA in current consumption according
to the datasheet [20]. This makes the external crystal the clear candidate for applications
involving high timing precisions.
Analysis of the results from the measurements in Sections 4.1.2 and 4.1.3 reveals that
each oscillator tends to have its own unique linear factor. For the internal oscillator, this
linear factor appears to originate from the microcontroller itself rather than the external
crystal. It is believed to be caused by manufacturing variations and aging, as the micro-
controllers used in the measurements were not new. For the external oscillators, however,
the linear drift component appeared to be unit-specific, indicating that the modules may
have inherent differences in stability.
Applying a static-compensation algorithm to remove linear drift, as described in Sec-
tion 4.1.4, was highly effective in mitigating this drift. After compensation, temperature-
induced effects became much more pronounced. Observing the correlation coefficients
for the internal oscillators reveals the difference in temperature-drift correlation strength
there is between them. From that observation emerged the hypothesis that each oscillator
may have a distinct “temperature-drift inertia”. That is, slow temperature changes appear
to affect some oscillators more strongly than others, whereas faster temperature variations
tend to produce similar responses across devices. Results from the diurnal temperature
test in Section 4.2.1 for the internal oscillators support this idea. In the diurnal tempera-
ture test there are more extreme temperatures involved and as such the temperature-drift
response for all of the internal oscillators exhibited extremely high, identical temperature-
drift correlation factor of approximately 99%. However, further measurements with slower
temperature gradients are necessary to confirm and quantify this effect.
During deployment linear compensation algorithm is hard to perform as it works by sam-
pling the first 10 minutes of the drift, calculating the average of the drift, and thereafter
subtracting the subsequent samples with the calibrated value. However, assuming that
the linear factor stays approximately constant for each device, this calibration can be per-
formed prior to deployment. Thereafter, the calibrated value can either be stored locally
on the device or transmitted to through the network.
The results indicate that the rate of temperature change does not significantly influence
the intrinsic behaviour of the oscillators, but it does affect the performance of the compen-
sation algorithm. A plausible explanation is that the compensation control-loop response
time depends on how quickly the temperature changes. When the compensation can-
not keep up with the thermal dynamics, the resulting drift becomes non-linear, in some
cases appearing to grow progressively over time. The magnitude of this effect also seems
device-dependent. For example, the external oscillator in Device 2 seemed to be more
susceptible to progressive temperature gradients than the external oscillator in Device
3. This needs consideration for in future implementations of temperature compensating
algorithms.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
47
==PAGE:56==
A simple temperature-based compensation approach was tested but not included in de-
tail in this work as it was very unsuccessful. The method assumed a constant tempera-
ture coefficient across the full operating range and compensated drift by subtracting the
measured temperature change multiplied by this coefficient. In all cases, this approach
performed worse than the uncompensated baseline. The results from the measurements
show that the temperature coefficient is not constant, but instead varies with temper-
ature which makes this simplified model invalid. To develop an effective compensation
method, a comprehensive temperature-profile measurement would be required which ide-
ally spans a wide range of controlled temperature conditions in a climate chamber. This
would make it possible to derive a useable compensation model. Due to the limited access
to the climate chamber, such measurements could not be carried out. Furthermore, reli-
able characterization would also require improved hardware, including a dedicated PCB
with controlled layout and minimized parasitics. Potential hardware improvements for the
setup are discussed in Section 6.2.
For the guard-time analysis, the non-temperature-compensated internal oscillator pro-
vides a fairly repeatable reference when it comes to long term drift. As shown in the
diurnal measurement, the drift tends to return to approximately the same value once the
temperature returns to its initial point as shown in the offset graph for the internal oscillator
in Figure 4.15. This temperature-drift repeatability does not appear clearly in the guard
time model, however. The guard time model relies on TDEV, which requires an averag-
ing interval τ. As τ increases, the number of valid overlapping samples decreases. A
practical rule of thumb is that the largest averaging interval should use roughly 10% of the
dataset length, ensuring that at least around 10 samples which increases the statistical
robustness. Beyond this point, the confidence in the estimate degrades rapidly. Because
of this limitation, TDEV cannot use the full 24 hour dataset at long τ, and therefore can-
not fully reveal the long term drift return observed in the raw diurnal measurements. For
future work, the diurnal experiment should be repeated and executed such that it simu-
lates the diurnal variations several times. This would allow the drift behaviour over the
full temperature cycle to be characterised with greater certainty. Feeding this multi-day
stability profile into the guard time model would likely produce a curved guard time be-
haviour where the guard time would increase as the temperature moves away from the
reference point, then stagnate or even decrease as the temperature returns to it the fol-
lowing day. This is assuming that temperature-drift determinism holds, which the results
from this work strongly suggest. It could therefore potentially be used as an alternative to
temperature compensation. Under mild bi-daily temeprature swings, a resynchronization
interval around 24 hours could theoretically maintain a relatively small guard time, since
the oscillator would assumingly return to a similar temperature (and therefore a similar
frequency bias) at each resynchronization event.
As discussed throughout this work, temperature exerts a substantial influence on the inter-
nal oscillator. In addition to algorithmic compensation, effective thermal insulation around
the oscillator is also desired. Improved insulation would enhance the performance of
the temperature-compensation methods by reducing the magnitude of rapid temperature
gradients. The results from the measurements indicate that fast temperature changes
seemingly affect the compensation algorithm more strongly than they affect the oscillator
itself. This is likely a consequence of the response time of the compensation control loop:
when the temperature changes quickly, the algorithm attempts to adjust, but the finite re-
action rate can allow significant drift to accumulate before the correction converges. This
can manifest as large temperoary deviations in the measured offset. Thermal insulation
would smooth out rapid gradients that can originate both from environmental tempera-
48
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:57==
ture fluctuations but also direct sunlight exposure, thereby reducing the burden on the
compensation loop. Further study is required to determine which insulation materials and
configurations are suitable for the intended application.
From the energy consumption chapter it is learned that across all scenarios the internal
oscillator is the more power efficient choice overall despite the energy losses due to higher
guard times. The higher guard times for the internal oscillators are not high enough to
make the external oscillator a more power efficient choice. This is before any temperature-
compensation methods have been applied to the internal oscillator which would further
improve its power efficiency through the reduction of guard times.
In the ArcLoRaM mesh network, nodes have different roles: gateways, relays and end-
nodes. Each type of node has different requirements for timing accuracy and power con-
sumption. End-nodes are the most power critical and would therefore benefit the most
from using the internal oscillator, which as the results show can be significantly improved
through software static compensation and shows great potential with temperature com-
pensation. Relays, which are equipped with larger batteries, can justify the use of an ex-
ternal oscillator. Since a relay provides timestamp information to multiple end-nodes, its
timing accuracy is more critical than that of a single end-node. Gateways are typically con-
nected to a continuous power source and serve as the network’s primary clock reference.
It is therefore recommended that gateways use a high accuracy GPS based transceiver
to provide a precise reference timestamp which can then be propagated to relays and
end-nodes. These design guidelines balance energy efficiency and timing accuracy with
respect to each node role. End-nodes prioritize low power, relays balance power and
accuracy and gateways prioritize absolute accuracy. Results from this research point to
this providing the most optimal network performance while respecting energy constraints.
6.2
Hardware Improvements
The ESP32 DevKit v1 used with the benchmarking setup is a general purpose board,
designed to highlight all the main features of the microcontroller without optimizing for any
specific application. At this stage, the project is still in early development and therefore
concrete specifications regarding the electrical design of the system is still undecided.
However, general design guidelines regarding best practices for optimal performance can
still be proposed.
6.2.1
Power Regulation
Low-Dropout Regulators
In the benchmarked ESP32 DevKit V1, the onboard power regulator is the NCP1117 low-
dropout regulator (LDO) [32]. An LDO is a type of linear regulator that uses an active pass
element, usually PMOS or PNP. The MOSFET acts as a variable resistor, adjusting the
voltage drop between the input and output to regulate the output voltage. The op-amp
continuously adjusts the MOSFET’s gate voltage to maintain a stable output voltage. Any
excess energy is dissipated as heat, creating a consistent voltage across the load. Inside
the LDO is a very precise reference voltage commonly set to 1.2 V or 1.25 V. Resistors
R1 and R2, form a voltage divider that scales the output voltage. When the feedback
of the op-amp, i.e. the output voltage, drops below the reference voltage the op-amp
reacts by pulling the PMOS gate down, releasing more current through the PMOS. LDOs
are generally suitable for applications that require low output noise, such as RF or other
high-frequency circuits where switching noise should be as low as possible. They are
also a cost-effective solution and simple to implement, making them a common choice
in general-purpose designs. However, in battery-powered applications, especially those
intended for long-term deployment in harsh environments such as in Greenland, LDOs
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.1: Low-Dropout Regulator
are far from ideal. When stepping down voltage, LDOs dissipate the excess energy as
heat, leading to poor power-conversion efficiency. This inefficiency shortens battery life
and can cause unwanted self-heating. [33] [34]
Buck Converters
For battery-powered applications, a buck conerter is a preferred choice. A buck converter
steps down voltage by rapidly switching a transistor on and off, storing energy in an induc-
tor, releasing it in a controlled way to the load. Instead of dissipating excess energy as
heat, it transfers energy efficiently by relying on inductive energy storage. This switching
provess enables conversion efficiencies of approximately 80% to 95%, depending on the
load and design quality.
Figure 6.2 shows a non-synchronous buck converter topology. When the high-side MOS-
FET turns on, current flows from the input through the inductor into the output capacitor
and load. When the MOSFET turns off, the inductor current continues to flow through a
diode. This diode conduction period introduces a voltage drop, typically around 0.3 V to
0.7 V , which reduces efficiency.
Figure 6.2: Non-synchronous Buck converter
Because of this limitation, many designs nowadays use a synchronous buck converters
highlighted in Figure 6.3. Instead of a diode, a second MOSFET acts as the freewheeling
path. MOSFETs have a much lower voltage drop, determined by the resistance across
the MOSFET, which is dramatically lower than for the diode. This significantly reduces
the conduction losses and generates significantly higher efficiency. They also support
features such as pulse-skipping or burst modes, which improve efficiency during ultra-low
power states such as ESP32 deep sleep. Additionally, the input voltage of typical battery
packs can vary significantly over time, and unlike an LDO, a buck converter maintains
stable output voltage with high efficiency throughout varying voltage range. This is one of
the reasons why a power supply variation measurement could not be performed properly.
Because attempts would fail due to the limitations of the LDO, which would shut off during
50
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:59==
slightly varying voltages. The buck converter maintains a stable system behaviour and
reduces thermal drift which are both highly important factors for the project. [35]
Figure 6.3: Synchronous Buck Converter
6.2.2
Battery Considerations
The specific type of buck converter most optimal for the system greatly depends on the
battery and the voltages to be worked with. In low-temperature conditions, conventional
lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries are generally not optimal. Their internal resistance increases
significantly in the cold, leading to reduced capacity and voltage sag during current spikes.
Furthermore, charging Li-ion in sub-zero degree circumstances is unsafe because of the
risk of lithium plating, which can cause permanent damage or failure. While Li-ion batter-
ies offer high energy density and are widely available, their poor cold-temperature perfor-
mance and charging limitations make them unsuitable for long-term Arctic deployements
[36].
Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePo4 or LFP) batteries are more robust. LFP’s battery chem-
istry is superior when it comes to thermal stability, cycle life and tolerance to extreme
temperatures compared to standard Li-ion. The discharge curve is flatter and more con-
sistant at low-temperatures. Charging the battery in sub-zero conditions is however still a
problem with this battery technology and so solar-charging or other recharging technology
would not be compatible [37].
For long-term and maintenance free deployements where recharging is not feasible, pri-
mary lithium-thionyl chloride (Li-SOCl2) batteries are often preferred. These non-rechargeable
batteries feature very high energy density, exceptionally low self-discharge and good low-
temperature performance. Their main limitation however is their inability to handle short
high-current bursts which the system would experience during wireless transmissions.
This issue could potentially be mitigated by adding a supercapacitor to handle the poten-
tial peak loads. This would, however, increase system costs [38].
To conclude, LFP cells are the best choice when rechargeability is required while Li-SOCl2
cells are ideal for long-term, low-maintenance operation where replacement rather than
recharging is acceptable. The selected battery chemistry directly influences the rest of
the power management circuitry and is therefore a vital decision for maximizing system
lifetime with respect to Arctic conditions. Li-Ion batteries are generally not optimal for low
temperature operation. LiFePo4 (LFP) is more tolerant to temperature extremes than Li-
ion type batteries with better discharge curve at lower temperatures. It is a rechargeable
system. However, charging the battery in sub-zero temperatures is problematic.
6.3
Future Research
As this research was time constrained, some corners had to be cut, which limited the
depth of some investigations. Based on the findings and limitations, several areas for
future work are recommended.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
51
==PAGE:60==
Future clock drift testing should prioritize a dedicated PCB design with a suitable power
management IC for further testing. This PCB should allow for a flexible integration of
both 32 kHz crystals and DS3231 TCXOs, support various sensor configurations, and be
able to act as each of the different node roles. By providing this controlled and robust
experimental setup, research could be made to study further compensation techniques
and practical protocol testing, creating a foundation for continued investigation beyond
the scope of this thesis.
Further research is needed on temperature compensation algorithms, evaluating their
feasibility via hardware control loops or through software. This study demonstrates that
software-based temperature compensation is promising. However, to implement it ef-
fectively, extensive testing using a climate chamber is required to map the temperature
profile and characterize the behaviour of the internal oscillator under varying conditions.
A detailed study of time synchronization protocols is important as it strongly affect both
energy efficiency and clock drift requirements and optimizing them could signficiantly im-
prove overall system performcance.
The current implementation uses the ESP32 platform, which is not optimized for ultra-low
power operation. Future work should explore porting the code to other microcontrollers,
such as the STM32 family, which offer more energy efficient devices that are potentially
better suited for long-term deployments as wireless sensor nodes. Porting would require
rewriting and some code adaptation from the existing software to the new platform.
Guard time model should be refined further to take into account the larger communication
network surrounding it which would provide more reliable guard time estimates.
52
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
This work presents a comprehensive evaluation of timing performance in an ESP32 based
system, comparing the internal oscillator of the microcontroller with an external temperature-
compensated DS3231 module. The results demonstrate that the internal oscillator, shows
promising potential for deployments in environmentally constrained conditions when ap-
propriate compensation methods are applied. A static-compensation algorithm proved
highly effective in mitigating the nominal drift, and the observed linear relationship be-
tween temperature and drift across a certain range suggests that effective temperature
compensation may be achievable with further refinement.
Guard time estimates indicate that, despite its higher drift, the internal oscillator remains
significantyl more power efficient than the external module which makes it an attractive op-
tion for power constrained nodes. The measurements further revealed that rapid temepra-
ture change affect the compensation control loop more strongly than they affect the os-
cillator itself, and that a device specific temperature-drift-inertia may exist, although this
behaviour was not fully quantified. These factors must be accounted for in future imple-
mentations of hardware or software based temperature compensation. Initial attempts
at temperature compensation were unsuccessful due to insufficient temperature profiling,
which emphasizes the need for further characterization using the climate chamber.
Based on the findings, a node-role dependent oscillator strategy is recommended where
end nodes should use the internal oscillator to maximize energy efficiency, relays should
use external temperature compensated modules, and gateways should rely on GPS based
clock reference. The work also highlights hardware considerations for long-term battery
powered deployments in constrained environments. Power regulation using buck con-
verters is strongly preferred over LDOs for efficiency and voltage requirements. Battery
selection should be guided by temperature tolerance, rechargeability, and peak-current
requirements, with LiFePO4 batteries suited for rechargeable systems and lithium-thionyl
chloride batteries ideal for long-term, low-maintenance deployments.
Overall, the findings of this thesis provide a foundation for the development of energy
efficient, temperature resilient timing systems for wireless sensor nodes deployed in the
Arctic.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Løkkegaard et al. “Greenland and Canadian Arctic ice temperature profiles database”.
In: The Cryosphere 17.9 (2023), pp. 3829–3845. DOI: 10.5194/tc-17-3829-2023.
URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/17/3829/2023/.
[2]
Bharath Sundararaman, Ugo Buy, and Ajay D. Kshemkalyani. “Clock synchroniza-
tion for wireless sensor networks: a survey”. In: Ad Hoc Networks 3.3 (2005), pp. 281–
323. ISSN: 1570-8705. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.002. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870505000144.
[3]
Simon Langlais and Erik Gottschalk. ArcLoRaM: Custom LoRa Based Mesh Proto-
col for the Arctic. Conference Paper. Technical University of Denmark, 2025.
[4]
William J. Riley. Handbook of Frequency Stability Analysis. NIST Special Publica-
tion 1065. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2008. URL: https://tf.
nist.gov/general/pdf/2220.pdf.
[5]
NASA. meshNetwork: A peer￿to￿peer mesh networking implementation. https://
github.com/nasa/meshNetwork. GitHub repository. 2023.
[6]
Christopher Becker and Garrick Merrill. Mesh Network Architecture for Enabling
Inter￿Spacecraft Communication. Conference Paper M17￿6083 / Document ID
20170009051. Accessed: 2025-07-28. NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, 2017.
URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20170009051/downloads/20170009051.pdf.
[7]
Mark Harris. What Is An Oscillator? Everything You Need to Know. Altium Re-
sources blog post. Accessed: 2025-11-29. 2020. URL: https://resources.altium.
com/p/everything-you-need-know-about-oscillators.
[8]
TCXO Tutorial. Accessed: 2025-11-29. Microchip Technology Inc. 2023. URL: https:
//ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/VOP/ApplicationNotes/
ApplicationNotes/TCXO+Tutorial.pdf.
[9]
Nihon Dempā Kogyo (NDK). OCXO Features and Tips for Use. NDK datasheet /
application note. Accessed: 2025￿11￿29. 2024. URL: https://www.ndk.com/en/
products/upload/lineup/pdf/OCXO_Features_and_Tips_for_Use_20240125.pdf.
[10]
John Kitching. “Chip-scale atomic devices”. In: Applied Physics Reviews 5.3 (Aug.
2018), p. 031302. ISSN: 1931-9401. DOI: 10.1063/1.5026238. eprint: https://pubs.
aip.org/aip/apr/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/1.5026238/14575726/031302\_1\_online.
pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5026238.
[11]
Hewlett-Packard. Quartz Oscillator Fundamentals: Application Note. Tech. rep. Ac-
cessed: 2025-07-29. U.S.A.: Hewlett-Packard, May 1997.
[12]
D.W. Allan. “Statistics of atomic frequency standards”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
54.2 (1966), pp. 221–230. DOI: 10.1109/PROC.1966.4634.
[13]
“IEEE Standard Definitions of Physical Quantities for Fundamental Frequency and
Time Metrology-Random Instabilities”. In: IEEE Std 1139-1999 (1999), pp. 1–40.
DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.1999.90575.
[14]
David W. Allan and Judah Levine. “A Historical Perspective on the Development of
the Allan Variances and Their Strengths and Weaknesses”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control 63.4 (2016), pp. 513–519.
DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2016.2524687.
[15]
Robert F.C. Vessot. “5.4. Frequency and Time Standards††This work was sup-
ported in part by contract NSR 09-015-098 from the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.” In: Astrophysics. Ed. by M.L. Meeks. Vol. 12. Methods in Experi-
mental Physics. Academic Press, 1976, pp. 198–227. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
55
==PAGE:64==
1016/S0076-695X(08)60710-3. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0076695X08607103.
[16]
William Riley and David Howe. Handbook of Frequency Stability Analysis. en. Jan.
2008. URL: https://tsapps.nist.gov/publication/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=50505.
[17]
David W. Allan, Neil Ashby, and Clifford C. Hodge. The Science of Timekeeping.
Tech. rep. HP Application Note 1289. Accessed: 2025-11-29. Allan’s Time, 1997.
URL: http : / / www . allanstime . com / Publications / DWA / Science _ Timekeeping /
TheScienceOfTimekeeping.pdf.
[18]
Oday Jubran and Bernd Westphal. “Optimizing Guard Time for TDMA in a Wireless
Sensor Network - Case Study”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Local Computer
Networks Workshops (LCN Workshops). Sept. 2014. DOI: 10.1109/LCNW.2014.
6927708.
[19]
STMicroelectronics. STM32F042x Datasheet. https://www.digikey.ch/htmldatasheets/
production/1776097/0/0/1/STM32F042x.pdf. 2023.
[20]
ESP32 Series Datasheet. Version 3.9. Espressif Systems. Apr. 2022. URL: https:
//www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32_datasheet_en.pdf.
[21]
Wurth Elektronik. 32 kHz THT Quartz Crystal Datasheet. Version V1.0024. Jan.
2025. URL: https://www.we-online.com/components/products/datasheet/830002996B.
pdf.
[22]
David L. Mills et al. Network Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and Algorithms
Specification. RFC 5905, Internet Engineering Task Force. June 2010. URL: https:
//www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5905.html.
[23]
United States Government. NAVSTAR GPS User Equipment Introduction. Archived
(PDF) from the original on September 10, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2008. Chapter
7. 2008.
[24]
Jon Nelson. What Is an Atomic Clock? https : / / www . nasa . gov / missions / tech -
demonstration/deep-space-atomic-clock/what-is-an-atomic-clock/. June 2019.
[25]
David W. Allan, Neil Ashby, and Clifford C. Hodge. The Science of Timekeeping.
Tech. rep. Application Note 1289. Hewlett-Packard Company, Colorado Springs,
CO, USA. Hewlett-Packard, 1997.
[26]
Galleon Systems. GPS Time Accuracy. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012.
Retrieved October 12, 2012. 2012. URL: https://www.atomic-clock.galleon.eu.com/
support/gps-time-accuracy.html.
[27]
Peter H. Dana and Bruce M. Penrod. “The Role of GPS in Precise Time and Fre-
quency Dissemination”. In: GPS World (July 1990). Archived (PDF) from the original
on December 15, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2014. URL: http://www.pdana.com/
PHDWWW_files/gpsrole.pdf.
[28]
u-blox AG. NEO-7 u-blox 7 GNSS Modules Datasheet. Version R07. Nov. 2014.
URL: https://content.u- blox.com/sites/default/files/products/documents/NEO-
7_DataSheet_%28UBX-13003830%29.pdf.
[29]
Analog Devices. DS3231: Extremely Accurate I²C-Integrated RTC/TCXO/Crystal.
2015. URL: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical- documentation/data-
sheets/ds3231.pdf.
[30]
ArcLoRaM Contributors. ArcLoRaM: Arctic LoRa Mesh Repository. https://github.
com/ArcLoRaM.
[31]
PROMICE. Programme for Monitoring of the Greenland Ice Sheet. https://promice.
org/. Accessed: 2025-02-12.
[32]
ON Semiconductor. NCP1117: 1.0 A Low-Dropout Positive Fixed and Adjustable
Voltage Regulators — Datasheet. Datasheet, ON Semiconductor. 2021. URL: https:
//www.onsemi.com/download/data-sheet/pdf/ncp1117-d.pdf.
56
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:65==
[33]
PM LDO Design Guide. Analog Devices, Inc. 2008. URL: https://www.analog.com/
media/en/Other/Miscellaneous/PM_ldo_design_08451b.pdf.
[34]
ElectronicsHub. Low-Dropout Regulator (LDO): What Is It and How It Works. Web-
site article. 2025. URL: https://www.electronicshub.org/ldo-low-drop-out-regulator/.
[35]
Texas Instruments. Buck Converter Basics. Tech. rep. SLVA057. Texas Instruments,
1999. URL: https://www.ti.com/lit/an/slva057/slva057.pdf.
[36]
X. Zhang, Y. Li, and J. Wang. “Low-temperature performance and durability of
lithium-ion batteries under isothermal conditions”. In: Journal of Power Sources 390
(2018), pp. 128–137. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.03.036. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1002007118307536.
[37]
P. Kurzweil and K. Brandt. “SECONDARY BATTERIES – LITHIUM RECHARGE-
ABLE SYSTEMS | Overview”. In: Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources.
Ed. by Jürgen Garche. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2009, pp. 1–26. ISBN: 978-0-444-
52745-5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-044452745-5.00185-4. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444527455001854.
[38]
Jauch. Properties and Advantages of Lithium￿Thionyl Chloride Batteries. Tech. rep.
Whitepaper, 2020.
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Robust Clock Synchronization Hardware for LoRa based Mesh Network Protocol
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
