==PAGE:1==
Analyzing the Potential of the Cycle Super-
highways in the Capital Region of Denmark
Master’s Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Martin Johan Hallberg
s172345
February 1, 2020
DTU Transport
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analyzing the Potential of the Cycle Superhighways in the Capital Region of Den-
mark
This report was written by:
Martin Johan Hallberg
Supervisors:
Jeppe Rich, Professor, Transport DTU
Thomas Kjær Rasmussen, Associate Professor, Transport DTU
DTU Transport
Department of Management Engineering
Bygningstorvet 116B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.transport.dtu.dk
Project period:
September 2019 - February 2020
ECTS:
30
Education:
Master of Science
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is a synthesis of the knowledge I have obtained during my two years
studying the MSc Eng programme in Transport and Logistics at the Technical
University of Denmark.
I am very thankful I got the opportunity working with
a project which has involved many diﬀerent parts of transport modelling, it has
widened my knowledge regarding both the theory and application within the ﬁeld of
transport. I would like to thank my two supervisors, Jeppe Rich and Thomas Kjær
Rasmussen. Their guidance, input and knowledge have been a most valuable asset
accomplishing this thesis. I would also like to issue a special thanks to Anna Garrett
and the rest of the Oﬃce for Cycle Superhighways, your interest and feedback
regarding this project has motivated me throughout the process. A special thanks is
also given to Mads Paulsen, PhD student at DTU Transport, for supplying me with
the bicycle network. I would like take the opportunity to dedicate this work and my
MSc Eng degree to my grandfather, Leif Hallberg, who on the day of writing this,
celebrates his 95th birthday.
Martin Hallberg
København, Februay 1, 2020
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
There are several problems linked to the current transportation system in cities and regions
today. According to the United Nations High-level Advisory Group in Sustainable Transport,
congestion in Europe is estimated to account for approximately 2% of the GDP. Additionally,
transport is accountable for signiﬁcant shares of CO2-emissions, as well as being a source of
both air and noise pollution. Bicycles have over the last decade gotten increased attention as
a possible solution to some of the transport related problems. This thesis explores potential
transport eﬀects, e.g. mode shift and travel time savings, due to the planned extension of
the cycle superhighway network in the Capital Region of Denmark. To incorporate a possible
future increase in the use of electric bicycles, multiple scenario analyses are applied.
The
study makes use of micro data from the Danish National Travel Survey to estimate a joint
destination and mode choice model. The direct beneﬁts from travel time reductions for bikes
are uncertain, a mean of the estimated beneﬁts from the main analysis and a conservative
analysis, renders beneﬁts in the range of 230 - 320 m. DKK per year in 2045. The range for
the beneﬁts is largely dependent on the assumption regarding increased use of electric bicycles.
The predicted mode shift from cars to bike is relatively small, 1-3%, which is similar to previous
ﬁndings. Most of the predicted new bicycle trips replace either walking or trips done by public
transport. The results does, however, indicate a total reduction of car-kilometers between 35
- 150 million per year, suggesting that there are additional indirect beneﬁts to the travel time
savings. To the knowledge of the author, this thesis is the ﬁrst predictive study examining the
eﬀects from region-wide deployment of a cycle superhighway network in Europe.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
10
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2
Area of Interest: Capital Region of Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Aim of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Literature Review
16
2.1
Assessments of the Cycle Superhighways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
General Bicycle Infrastructure Assessments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Data
18
3.1
Danish National Travel Survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Bicycle Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Speed data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methodology
22
4.1
Destination and Mode Choice Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.1
Discrete Choice Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
Model Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Route Assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Model Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Model Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.1
Pivoting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.2
Consumer Surplus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
36
5.1
Destination and Mode Choice Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Number of bicycle trips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.3
Consumer surplus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Case Study
42
==PAGE:10==
6.1
Forecasting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Discussion
48
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Appendices
A1
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the reader to the subject of this thesis.
More speciﬁcally, it presents
challenges regarding the current transport system and how biking have been proposed to be a
possible solution. Furthermore, it describes the area of interest, the Capital Region of Denmark.
Lastly, the chapter presents the aim for this study.
1.1
Background
There are many problems linked to the current transportation systems in cities and regions world-
wide. Even though the issues in many cases diﬀer in terms of severity and reasons, there are often
time common elements. Congestion is estimated to be a signiﬁcant burden on the economy for
both cities and nations, ranging from 2% of GDP for Europe to up to 10% of GDP for a single
city such as Beijing, according to the United Nations High-level Advisory Group in Sustainable
Transport (United Nations 2016). According to the European Commission, European cities face
increasing problems related to transport and traﬃc (European Commission n.d.[b]), and have
launched several initiatives regarding sustainable urban mobility (CIVITAS n.d.; ELTIS n.d.).
Furthermore, urban transportation is accountable for 40% of all road transport CO2-emissions
and for 70% of other pollutants from transport (European Commission n.d.[b]). Morever, road
transport is the biggest source of environmental noise, with around 100 million people in the EU
exposed to noise levels above the EU’s indicator level for noise annoyance (European Environmental
Agency n.d.). Considering the expected increase in urbanization, the urbanization rate in Europe
is expected to increase from the current 74 % to 84% in 2050, other regions face even larger increase
(European Commission n.d.[a]), the pressure and use of the transport system can be assumed to
become more intense.
Over the last decade, bicycles have gotten increased attention as one of the solutions to the
current transport system, as an example, the journal Transport Reviews have experienced a 13-fold
increase in the number of articles related to cycling (Buehler and Dill 2016). Furthermore, mega
cities such as London and New York have launched bicycle plans which aim to increase the quality
and quantity of bike infrastructure (Transportation Alternatives 2017; City of London 2016). Also,
bike-sharing schemes now exist in over 800 cities world-wide (Fishman and Cherry 2016).
According to a report from the International Transport Forum, the potential positive eﬀects
from encouraging bicycle use could be several, e.g. addressing congestion, reducing pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions, as well as increase physical activity, and hence, improve health (Inter-
national Transport Forum 2013). With scarce space in cities, bicycle paths are also considered as
a means to reduce the congestion levels, where according to (Litman 2013), an optimal congestion
reduction program includes space-eﬃcient transport options such as walking and biking. In a re-
port from the EU-supported H2020-Flow program, 20 examples of infrastructure projects where
measures to support walking or biking had been taken, were examined. The result showed that ten
of the projects resulted in improved traﬃc ﬂow for motorised vehicles, while one of the projects
experienced decreased traﬃc ﬂow (Thorsten Koska et al. 2016). The eﬀectiveness of bicycle infras-
tructure projects in the regard of mode shift from car to bike has, however, been shown to have a
marginal eﬀect, being around 2-3%, (Van Goeverden, T. S. Nielsen, et al. 2015).
Other positive aspects of cycling are the positive health beneﬁts obtained, both for the indi-
vidual switching from private car to bicycle, as well as for the surrounding population due to the
reduction of emissions (Doorley, Pakrashi, and Ghosh 2017; Mueller et al. 2018). As reported in
(Buekers et al. 2015), where the construction of cycle highways in the region of Flanders was inves-
tigated, the majority of the health beneﬁts comes from increased physical activity. From the same
study, it is reported that in almost every case, health beneﬁts alone would exceed the construction
cost, meaning that reduction in congestion, CO2-emissions and noise were ignored.
10
==PAGE:12==
With the relatively recent introduction of electrical bikes (e-bikes), the possibilities of travelling
longer distances by bike have been enabled for a larger part of the population. In a study from
the Netherlands, results demonstrated that electrical bikes were considered an alternative mode
for motorized transport for distances where regular bikes were perceived as too long (Plazier,
Weitkamp, and Berg 2017). Generally, commuters using e-bikes tend to travel longer than com-
muters on conventional bikes, this is found in a literature review in (Cairns et al. 2017), and in a
study examining 10 000 European citizens self-stated travel behaviour (Castro et al. 2019).
Coinciding with the market penetration of e-bikes, a new bicycle infrastructure concept has
emerged, so-called cycle superhighways. Other terms for similar type of infrastructure are ”green-
ways”, ”high-quality cycle paths”, ”cycle highways”. According to (Liu et al. 2019), there is no
deﬁnition, but most often practitioners refer to either a deﬁnition regarding the goals of implement-
ing cycle superhighways, or to a deﬁnition regarding the physical design, e.g. quality standards,
speed, directness, routing and signs. Cycle superhighways have ﬁrst and foremost emerged in loca-
tions with an already existing extensive cycle network and strong cycling culture, e.g. Copenhagen
(Supercykelstier n.d.), the Netherlands (Fietssnelweg 35 n.d.) and Flanders (Fietssnelwegen n.d.).
London is another example of where cycle superhighways have been implemented since 2010 (Li
et al. 2018; City of London 2016).
1.2
Area of Interest: Capital Region of Denmark
The area for this thesis has been chosen in order to coincide with the future network of cycle
superhighways on the island of Zealand, Denmark. The majority of the area is within the Capital
Region of Denmark while a smaller part belongs to Region Zealand. For simplicity, the area will
for the remainder of the text be referred to as the Capital Region of Denmark. A map over the area
can be seen in Figure 1. In total, the area has a population of around two million inhabitants and
spans over 34 municipalities (Danmarks Statistik n.d.). The demographic and economical centre
for the area is the city of Copenhagen. The municipality of Copenhagen has a total population of
620 000 inhabitants, adding the population of Frederiksberg, a separate municipality within the
city, the total population exceeds 700 000 inhabitants (Danmarks Statistik n.d.).
Copenhagen has during several decades developed a strong and famous bicycle culture. The
re-introducing of the bike as a mode of transport was initialized in the 1970’s due to the oil
crisis and economic recession (G¨ossling 2013). The development continued over the next-coming
decades and in 2002, the municipality launched its ﬁrst bicycle strategy (G¨ossling 2013). Today,
the bicycle culture has become a strong identiﬁcator for the city, and the current bicycle strategy
aims to make Copenhagen the best city in the world for cycling (Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen
2011). To enable longer and multi-modal trips, it is free to bring the bike on the S-trains (local
trains) in Copenhagen. On the Metro, it is possible to bring the bike during certain hours and
for a fee (Region Hovedstaden 2019). Other examples of the city’s focus on cycling are the two
cycle bridges Cykelslangen and Lille Langebro. The two bridges are relatively new infrastructure
developments, built in 2014, respectively 2019, and connects the city’s two river fronts.
The many investment in bicycle infrastructure and active support of using bike for transporta-
tion, have enabled the region to have a high share of cyclists. In fact, 22 % of all trips in the Capital
Region is done by bike, according to the latest oﬃcial report of bicycle data in the Capital Region
(Region Hovedstaden 2016). It should be noticed that the numbers diﬀer between the areas of
the region, in the municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg, the number is as high as 33 %,
while in more rural areas, the share of trips done by bike is signiﬁcantly lower, approximately 12%.
In total, the number of person-kilometers travelled by bike increased by 44% from 2007 to 2016.
Furthermore, the report states that, since the share of trips made by bike have been rather stable
during 2007 - 2016, the increase in the share of person kilometre for bike is due to longer average
average trip length by bike (Region Hovedstaden 2016). The trip length also aﬀect the choice of
transportation mode, and in the case of bikes, the share of trips largely varies depending on the
trip length. Table 1 displays the market share for bicycle over diﬀerent trip lengths. The numbers
11
==PAGE:13==
show that the share is relatively high for trips below 10 kilometres, while it is substantially lower
for longer trips.
Table 1: The share of trips made by bike over varying trip length, [%]
(Region Hovedstaden 2016)
Area
Trip Length[km]
0 - 2
2 - 5
5 - 10
10 - 25
25 <
Mun. Cph & Frederiksberg
32
49
39
10
1
Suburban
26
24
13
7
1
Rural
20
20
10
1
1
The current statistics regarding the use of electrical bikes in Denmark is rather uncertain.
According to a summary of the Danish National Travel Survey (TU), the share of number of trips
made by electrical have increased from 1% in 2014 to 4% in 2017 (Technical University of Denmark
2018). More recent numbers, taken from a study made by the Danish Road Directorate, entails an
ownership rate of electrical bikes as a high as 29% in the Capital Region, and thus, indicates higher
user rates than in 2017. Furthermore, a relatively new pilot scheme has allowed speed pedelecs,
which are electrical bikes where the motor assists up to a speed of 45 km/h, compared to regular
where the corresponding is 25 km/h, to be ridden on bicycle infrastructure from July 2018 (Danish
Road Safety Agency 2019). The scheme allows persons from the age of 15 to drive speed pedelecs,
for persons below the age of 18 a driver license for moped is obligatory. As part of the evaluation
of the trial, the use and propagation of speed pedelecs in Denmark will be investigated (Danish
Road Safety Agency 2019).
As presented above, cycling plays an important part in the current transportation system in the
Capital Region of Denmark. Moreover, the share of trips made by public transport is signiﬁcantly
higher than the rest of the country, according the Traﬁc and Mobility Plan for the region (Region
Hovedstaden 2019).
At the same time, the plan points out that the region is subject to the
heaviest congestion, which is expected to increase alongside with the population increase of 20
000 inhabitants per year up to 2035. The forecast acknowledges that this will mean 20% more
trips in 2035, which will double the current estimated cost of congestion of 17 million DKK to 33
million DKK (Region Hovedstaden 2019). One of the conclusions in the report, is therefore that
the sole solution to the problems cannot be to increase road capacity. In parallel to this, it can be
mentioned that the municipality of Copenhagen aims to be climate neutral in 2025 (Københavns
Kommune 2012), it should, however, be noted that the plan states that the emission from the
transportation system will not be zero, and, hence, have to be compensated by negative emissions
in other sectors.
Cycle Superhighways
As brieﬂy mentioned earlier in the text, a network of cycle superhighways is under development
within the Capital Region of Denmark and parts of Region Zealand. The project started in 2009
and is today a collaboration between the Capital Region of Denmark and 27 municipalities in the
area (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier n.d.). According the their website, the goal of the creation
of the Cycle Superhighways is to enable biking to become a competitive mode of transportation
and increase the number of bicycle commuters in the region. A quote from the website describing
a cycle superhighway is seen below.
A cycle superhighway is a cycle highway, where the commuters’ needs have been given
the highest priority. The project seeks to create routes that oﬀer direct routes as well
as comfortable and safe service. (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier n.d.)
Features which have been implemented to raise the quality of the cycle superhighway network
are safer intersections, green waves, air pumps and clear signage. Furthermore, the routes are drawn
and designed with the aim of having as few stops as possible (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier
12
==PAGE:14==
n.d.). More speciﬁcally, there are four quality features for a Cycle Superhighway (Sekretariatet for
Supercykelstier 2019b).
• Accessibility - the Cycle Superhighways shall connect concentrations of places for work, studies
and housing, as well as public transport. They shall also create a linked network which connects all
the municipalities and is easy to ﬁnd for the commuters.
• Passability - the Cycle Superhighways shall oﬀer the fastest way between work and home for
commuters, with as few obstacles and stops as possible, and the possibility biking in your own pace.
• Comfort - the Cycle Superhighways shall make the bicycle trip to a pleasant experience.
This
incorporates high degree of maintenance, good paving and extra services.
• Safety - the Cycle Superhighways shall increase safety and ensure good conditions, which decreases
the risk of bicycle accidents.
Since the ﬁrst Cycle Superhighway opened in 2012, another seven of the 45 planned routes have
been constructed. The total network is planned to span over 750 kilometre in 2045 and the total
cost is estimated to 2.2 billion DKK (Incentive 2018). The eight existing routes in 2019 constitutes
a total length of 170 kilometres (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier 2019b).
Figure 1: Map over the Capital Region of Denmark and planned network of cycle superhighways.
1.3
Aim of the study
This study aims to investigate the potential eﬀects on transport behaviour, e.g. mode shift, number
of trips and travel distance, due to the planned extension of the existing cycle superhighway
network in the Capital Region of Denmark. Apart from the expansion of the cycle superhighway
network, the report examines what eﬀects a coinciding increase use of electric bicycles might
have. In addition to the pure transport impacts, the study also aims to estimate socio-economic
13
==PAGE:15==
beneﬁts resulting from reduced travel time and possible mode shift. The study also exempliﬁes how
transport modelling methodologies can be applied to forecast eﬀects of network-wide improvements
of bicycle infrastructure, and thus, being a potential additional tool in assessments of such projects.
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review regard-
ing evaluation of bicycle infrastructure projects in general, and cycle superhighways speciﬁcally.
Section 3 presents the data used in the project, whereafter Section 4 describes the methodology.
Subsequently, an overview of the results are presented in Section 5, a more in-depth analysis is
presented in Section 6. Lastly, a discussion of the results is presented in Section 7.
14
==PAGE:16==
15
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature Review
The literature review is divided into two parts, one focusing on previous assessments and evalu-
ations of the existing Cycle Superhighway routes in the area. The second part presents ﬁndings
from general bicycle infrastructure assessments.
2.1
Assessments of the Cycle Superhighways
The Oﬃce for Cycle Superhighways have evaluated each of the eight existing routes after their
opening, the evaluations examines e.g. changes in volumes of cyclists and travel speed. By ques-
tionnaires, the evaluations also assess weather new cyclists previously used other modes or routes,
their trip purpose and satisfaction with the route. A compilation of key numbers for the Cycle
Superhighways from 2019, presented in (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier 2019a), can be seen in
Table 2. The range has been added to the extent that it has been reported.
Table 2: Numbers from compilation of the Cycle
Superhighways (Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier 2019a)
Mean
Range
Increase in cyclists [%]
23
(2 - 68)
Previous car users [%]
14
(9 - 26)
Route length [km]
11
(6.4 - 14.7)
Speed [km/h]
19
-
Total daily length biked [km]
400 000
-
Share of women [%]
52
-
Besides the individual assessments of the routes, a socio-economic assessment of the Cycle
Superhighways was conducted in 2018 (Incentive 2018). The report estimates a return of investment
of 11%, which amounts to 5.7 billion DKK. The construction and maintenance costs are expected
to be 2.2, respectively 4.6 billion DKK. It is, however, also stated that the calculations in the
report are subject to uncertainties. The largest uncertainties are regarding the attracted bicycle
trips and travel time savings, the latter constituting more than 50% of the calculated beneﬁts,
7.5 out of 13.4 billion DKK. The estimation of travel times savings are performed by assuming a
percentage of induced cycling as well as a travel time elasticity, whereafter the travel time savings,
which are needed to achieve the induced cycling, can be calculated. In the analysis, the mean
value of induced traﬃc is 9% but varies over diﬀerent types of routes e.g. rural, urban. The travel
time elasticity is assumed to be -1 in the main analysis. Furthermore, it is stated that the induced
cycling needs to be at least 4.4% in order to meet the Danish Ministry of Finance’s goal of a return
of investment of 4% and that the reduction of space for cars is expected to increase travel time for
cars corresponding to a value of 0.8 billion DKK.
After the new pilot scheme for speed pedelecs had been approved in 2018, an analysis regarding
the possibility of riding to speeds up to 40 km/h on the Cycle Superhighways was conducted by
Via Traﬁk in 2019 (Via Traﬁk 2019). The results show that, currently, only 8% of the total network
length is suitable for speeds up to 40 km/h, 50% is deemed to need physical measures to ensure
safe riding and 42% was deemed to not be suitable at all. The reason for not being suitable diﬀer
in character, common for the 42% considered not suitable at all was that it ran along building
facades. For the 50% which is considered to need physical measures, the main problems were width
and scarcity of space to overtake safely.
Besides the oﬃcial evaluation, the traﬃc eﬀects of one of the routes, Albertslundsruten, have
been examined and published in a journal article (Skov-Petersen et al. 2017). In their analysis,
(Skov-Petersen et al. 2017) uses linear regression to assess the number of cyclists on Albertslund-
sruten, as well as a nearby bicycle lane as control, before the improvement, one year after and
two year after the improvement. Controlling for variables such as weather, seasonal eﬀects, and
16
==PAGE:18==
time of day, the results showed signiﬁcant increase in volumes of cyclists, with up to an increase
of 61% for certain periods of day and year. By using questionnaires, (Skov-Petersen et al. 2017)
also ﬁnds that approximately 4-6% of the new users previously used another mode of transport.
The improved bicycle infrastructure also resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in satisfaction with the
quality, compared to the control site.
2.2
General Bicycle Infrastructure Assessments
Due to their relatively recent deployment, the literature regarding cycle superhighways is relatively
scarce, especially when looking at aggregated network eﬀects. To the knowledge of the author,
evaluations and potential eﬀects have been reported from M¨unich, (Rayaprolu, Llorca, and Moeckel
2018), the Netherlands (Van Goeverden and Godefrooij 2011), Patna, India (Agarwal, Ziemke, and
Nagel 2019) and London (Li et al. 2018). By estimating a mode choice model and subsequently
forecasting mode choices with an implemented cycle superhighway, (Rayaprolu et al. 2018), applies
a similar methodology as proposed for this study.
There are, however, signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between the studies since (Rayaprolu et al. 2018) only consider one route and calculates levels-
of-service for the diﬀerent modes by imputing values, and not by any route assignment. Both
(Rayaprolu et al. 2018) and (Agarwal et al. 2019) uses agent-based simulation to forecast the
eﬀect from the implementation of cycle superhighways. The two studies show high potential for
increasing market share for bikes, as well as reducing market share for cars. In (Rayaprolu et al.
2018), the potential increase of market share for bike in certain areas is estimated to 25%, while
in in Patna, it is as high as 44%. These numbers does, however, reﬂect the market share if the
travelling speed at a cycle superhighway can be twice as on a regular cycle path. Hence, the studies
are subject to large uncertainties, which are also emphasised in the articles.
A summary of a model study of Dutch cycle superhighways is presented in (Van Goeverden and
Godefrooij 2011), together with other evaluations of Dutch bicycle infrastructure projects. Also
this study relies on the assumption of an increased speed on cycle superhighways, the assumption is,
however, a bit more conservative since it assumes an increase from 15 km/h to 18 km/h. The results
indicate 1.3% more trips by bike and 0.7% less trips by car, it is not stated whether the increase
in biking trips is from mode changes or an increase in the number of journeys. Furthermore, the
results show yearly savings of e 100 million on health care and avoidance of premature deaths.
It is also stated that if 50% of the bicycles trips are made by electrical bikes and an increase of
average speed from 20 km/h to 24 km/h is experienced, a two- to threefold increase in beneﬁts
would be reached.
Assessments which investigates improved and extended bicycle networks, not focusing on cycle
superhighways, have been performed in Minnesota, USA (Krizek, Barnes, and Thompson 2009),
Montreal, Canada (Amir et al. 2016) and Delft, the Netherlands (Van Goeverden and Godefrooij
2011; Van Goeverden, T. S. Nielsen, et al. 2015). (Krizek et al. 2009; Amir et al. 2016) examines the
general change in percentage of cyclists over a ten-year period, not subject to any speciﬁc projects
but rather a general improvement of bicycle infrastructure on a city-level, (Van Goeverden and
Godefrooij 2011) reports changes due to a comprehensive upgrade of a city-wide bicycle network in
the 1980’s. Marginal positive increases are found in all three, e.g. (Van Goeverden and Godefrooij
2011) report that modal shift from car to bike due to improvements in bicycle infrastructure have
generally been found to be 2-3%.
17
==PAGE:19==
3
Data
This section presents the three main data sources used; data from the Danish National Transport
Survey (TU), network data from Open Street Map (OSM) and data regarding speed of cyclists
from the Danish Road Directorate. The presentation includes description regarding the origin of
the data, any modiﬁcations which has been done and, if relevant, summary statistics.
3.1
Danish National Travel Survey
Data regarding tours have been obtained from the Danish National Travel Survey (TU). The survey
contains detailed travel data from persons between the age of 10-84 and has been collected from
2006 (DTU Transport n.d.[c]). Each year, around 11 000 interviews with a representative sample
of the Danish population are conducted. The data collected includes information regarding travel
activity e.g. number of trips, mode and trip length, as well as socio-economic information e.g. age,
gender and income.
To comply with the goal of this thesis and the used methodology, the original data set have
been ﬁltered according to certain criteria which are presented below. It should be noted that the
used entity is tours, also called trip chain.
(i) Only tours which starts and ends within the investigated area are included. This is due to
the problems of calculating travel time for tours going outside the area.
(ii) Only tours which stars and ends at home, or regular tour base, are included. This is done to
avoid open tours, where the journey either starts or ends outside of home.
(iii) Only tours which have been by walking, bike, car driver, car passenger or public transport
are included. Where a combination of modes have been reported, the main mode have been
considered.
(iv) Tours where the purpose of the tour is business related are not included. This is due to their
higher value-of-time, and, thus, need for estimating a separate model.
Observations with either missing or incomplete data have been imputed or discarded. Impu-
tation was only used for personal income, where a relatively large share of the observations where
missing, approximately 25%. Observations which had missing values other than personal income
was discarded, approximately 1%. The personal income imputation was done by hot-deck imputa-
tion, where the data is split into chosen domains (categorical variables) and the missing values are
imputed sequentially based on chosen ordering (continuous variables) (Kowarik and Templ 2016).
Diﬀerent sets of domains and orders were tested, with the aim of having similar data structure for
the imputed data set and the non-imputed data set, e.g. minimum, maximum and quantile values.
Summary statistics for the three diﬀerent imputations can be found in Table A1 in Appendix A.
The used imputation, number three in Table A1, was split by gender, occupation, education level
and whether the job was in public or in private sector. The ordering was based on age and the
stated number of working hours per week.
The ﬁnal data set contains 53 198 tours from 37 612 individuals, meaning that one individual
can perform multiple closed tours during one day. The observations are spread over the years from
2006 - 2019. Summary statistics of the ﬁnal data set can be seen in Table 3.
18
==PAGE:20==
Table 3: Summary statistics of TU data, n = 53 198
Variable
Categories
Socio-economic
Gender
Male
46.6%
Female
53.4%
Age
Q1: [10 −28]
25.8%
Q2: [29 −43]
26.0%
Q3: [44 −57]
23.6%
Q4: [57 −94]
24.6%
Occupation
Full-time employment, ≥32
h/w
49.0%
Part-time employment, < 32
h/w
8.0%
Student
20.4%
Retired
17.8%
Unemployed
2.8%
Other out of job
2.0%
Family
Single
20.4%
Single with kids
7.2%
Couple
28.8%
Couple with kids
43.6%
No. of cars
0
22.9%
1
52.8%
2 ≤
24.3%
Income [DKK]
(yearly)
Mean
306 000
Standard deviation
443 000
Driv. licence
Yes
75.1%
No
24.9%
Bike
Yes
79.0%
No
21.0%
Trip Characteristics
Observed Mode
Walk
20.3%
Bicycle
22.8%
Car Driver
36.8%
Car Passenger
8.6%
Public Transport
11.4%
Trip Purpose
Commute
24.8%
Education
8.8%
Escort
7.3%
Shop
22.4%
Leisure
36.7%
3.2
Bicycle Network
The bicycle network used is based on an Open Street Map (OSM) network (Open Street Map
n.d.).
OSM is an open-source geographic information system (GIS) data base, which includes
e.g. street networks, land use maps and points of interest. The information regarding the planned
alignment for the future cycle superhighways have been obtained by a map from the Oﬃce for Cycle
Superhighways.
Since the OSM network is being updated continuously, the currently existing
cycle superhighways are included in the network. Also, several of the planned routes follow to
varying extent already existing infrastructure.
For cases where there currently are no bicycle
infrastructure, the created links have followed the proposed alignment obtained from the Oﬃce
for Cycle Superhighways. Note that this a proposed alignment which might be subject to changes
during later stages of the design phase.
Every link in the original OSM network is classiﬁed according to a set of 17 classiﬁcations,
indicating the type of bicycle infrastructure. To suit the purpose of this project, the classiﬁcation
scheme was transformed to a three-level network; shared infrastructure, dedicated bicycle infras-
tructure and cycle superhighway.
The re-categorization was done by assigning the 17 original
classiﬁcations to one of either shared or dedicated bicycle infrastructure, seen in Table 4, which
followed from a general assessment using Google Maps (Google n.d.). Dedicated should in this case
be understood as separate bicycle infrastructure, e.g. cycleway, cycle path or any other separated
infrastructure. The cycle superhighway category was created by either changing the classiﬁcation,
for the links which coincided with the cycle superhighway network, or set to cycle superhighway,
for the creation of new links. Intersection polygons have been taken from the coming traﬃc model
for Copenhagen, COMPASS (MOE Tetraplan n.d.).
19
==PAGE:21==
Table 4: Re-classiﬁcation of OSM types to bicycle infrastructure categories.
Used Category
OSM Type
Shared
Residential, footway, living street, path, pedestrian, service, track, trunk or unclassiﬁed.
Dedicated
Tertiary, cycleway, primary, primary or secondary.
Cycle Superhighway
Created manually
3.3
Speed data
To analyse the speed of cyclists in the region, data from the Danish National Road Directory data
bank Mastra (Vejdiktoratet n.d.), have been examined. The speed is measured by tubes which
register the time and length diﬀerences when the wheels pass, and have been collected throughout
the Capital Region of Denmark during 2018 and 2019. To limit the impact of scooters or mopeds,
since the measures does not indicate what type of two-wheeler that is passing, observations of
speeds above 30 km/h have been discarded. Furthermore, the absence of an indicator for what
type of bike that is used, disables a comparison of speed between diﬀerent type of bikes. Hence, the
speed data from Mastra is used to assess diﬀerence in cycling speed between the three infrastructure
categories presented above.
A subset of the available data at Mastra have been used for this report. In total, data from
48 locations where used. The locations were chosen with the attempt of ﬁnding suﬃciently many
observation for each category of bicycle infrastructure. To examine what type of bicycle infras-
tructure that was present for every location, Google Maps and Google Street (Google n.d.) was
used together with the noted addresses. The result from the data analysis is found in Section 4.2.
20
==PAGE:22==
21
==PAGE:23==
4
Methodology
The methodology in this thesis revolves around the use of discrete choice modelling to model
the choice of destination and transport mode. A discrete choice model is a model of supply and
demand. In a transport setting, the supply is often time described by the travel time and travel
cost, also called level-of-service, which are calculated by a route assignment model. The demand
is described by the observed chosen mode and destination. The observation regarding choice of
destination and mode usually comes from travel surveys or similar, TU data in this case.
Figure 2 displays a thematic ﬁgure of how these diﬀerent elements are connected. Note the
label of Descriptive Model for the left-hand side and Prescriptive Model for the right-hand side,
this aims to stress that the role of transport models often are to ﬁrst model, and thereafter, to
forecast transport behaviour when the input to the model changes (Rich and Mabit 2019). This
is also indicated by the Base and Scenario labels on the two respective sides. The two models,
the joint mode and destination choice model and route choice model, are described separately in
Section 4.1, respectively Section 4.2. The prescriptive part, where trip predictions are made and
subsequently user beneﬁts in terms of consumer surplus are calculated, is described in Section 4.3.
Figure 2: Figure displaying an overview of how the models are connected, together with input
and output for the models.
Scenarios
To decide scenarios for this project, the planned construction year interval for the cycle super-
highway routes have been used, seen in Table 5. The table displays that there are three scenario
networks and one base network, which is the currently existing network. This means that calcu-
lated eﬀects from the Cycle Superhighways only includes the coming routes and not the already
existing. To be able to include the already existing routes in the calculation, an extensive work
of creating a pre-Cycle Superhighways network would be needed. A ﬁgure over the four networks
can be seen in Figure 3. Note that the scenarios are sequential, meaning that all routes included
in Scenario 1 are also included in Scenario 2 and Scenario 3.
Table 5: An overview of the length of the base and scenario networks
Name
Status
Length [km]
Total Length [km]
Base (0)
Existing
162
162
Scenario 1
Under construction
76
238
Scenario 2
Planned 2018 - 2030
436
674
Scenario 3
Planned 2030 - 2045
75
749
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3: The routes belonging to each scenario. Note that the scenarios are sequential, meaning
that routes included in an earlier scenario, are also included in the subsequent scenarios
Mixes
Since the current market share and adaptation rate of electrical bicycles in Denmark are uncertain,
nine diﬀerent mixes have been assumed. The mixes describe the market share for regular bicycles,
e-bikes and speed pedelecs, and regards to the market share in terms of number of trips. Allowing
for diﬀerent market shares of bikes, is interesting from the perspective of e-bikes and speed pedelecs
being able to further exploit the beneﬁts of better infrastructure, due to their higher travelling
speed. The mixes are presented in Table 6. Mix 1 is considered to represent the existing situation
in Denmark, which is based on the previously presented data in Section 1 from (Danmarks Statistik
2019). The mixes span over relatively large interval of market shares, enabling forecasting for
scenarios where the adaptation of bicycles is large. To keep the number of mixes to a manageable
23
==PAGE:25==
amount, the market share for e-bikes has been assumed to be larger than speed pedelecs.
Table 6: The nine mixes of markets share for bicycle types.[%]
Bicycle Type
Mix
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Regular bicycle
95
89.5
85
74.5
70
65
49.5
45
40
Electric bicycle
4.5
10
10
25
25
25
50
50
50
Speed pedelec
0.5
0.5
5
0.5
5
10
0.5
5
10
The two tables presented here, Table 5 and Table 6, can be found in the nomenclature on the
last page of this report. On this page, also all notations later described in the methodology are to
be found.
4.1
Destination and Mode Choice Model
This section brieﬂy introduces the theory behind discrete choice models and examples of previous
work which has applied similar methodology. Furthermore, the section provides a description of
the structure and speciﬁcation of the estimated model.
4.1.1
Discrete Choice Models
As stated in the ingress of this section, this thesis makes us of discrete choice modelling. The
basis for discrete choice models is random utility theory, which relies on the assumption that for
a group of individuals, or other decision-makers, given a set of alternatives e.g. using car, bicycle
or public transport, a utility function can be modelled for each individual and alternative. The
utility function is commonly written as in Equation 1, and consists of one total utility Unm for
individual n choosing alternative m, being the sum of one deterministic term Vnm, which can be
modelled, and one error term ϵnm, which can not be modelled. A more detailed descriptions of the
theory and application of discrete choice models can be found in either (Rich and Mabit 2019) or
(Train 2009).
Unm = Vnm + εnm
∀n, m
(1)
By assuming that each individual is striving for utility maximization, i.e.
each individual
chooses the alternative giving the highest individual utility, and a distribution of the error term,
the probability of individual n choosing alternative m can be written as in Equation 2, which is
known as the multinomial logit model (Rich and Mabit 2019). The random utility model framework
oﬀers several types of model e.g. multinomial logit, nested logit, probit or mixed logit. Which
model that is used is often a question regarding the goal of the modelling and the sought complexity.
Pnm =
exp(Vnm)
P
m′ exp(Vnm′)
(2)
What is actually modelled is the indirect utility function Vnm, which is a function of both
mode speciﬁc variables, also called attributes, for each mode m and individual speciﬁc variables,
also called characteristics, for each observation n. The attributes typically consists of travel time
and travel cost, while the characteristics consists of socio-economic variables, e.g.
age, gender
and occupation. Variables which are not connected to a speciﬁc mode or individual, e.g. built
24
==PAGE:26==
environment or weather, can also enter the indirect utility function. A parametrized version of
the indirect utility function is shown in Equation 5. Note that mode speciﬁc variables are labelled
Xm, individual speciﬁc variables are labelled Zm and other variables are labelled by Θm.
Vnm = km +
X
m
βX
m · Xm +
X
m
βZ
m · Zm +
X
m
βΘ
m · Θm
∀n, m
(3)
One of the drawbacks of the multinomial logit model is due to the IIA property, IIA is an
acronym for ”Independence of Irrelevant Alternative”. This feature of the mulitnomial logit model
describes the fact that the relative share between the probabilities of two alternatives will remain
unchanged, independent of the utility of other alternatives. Meaning that in the case of choosing
between car, bike and bus, an increase in the cost of driving a car, results in an equal relative
increase for both bike and bus. In reality, it might be that some alternatives share similarities,
and, hence, other substitution patterns would occur.
To allow for more realistic substitution
patterns, a nested model can be applied. In a nested model, the alternatives sharing similarities
are put in the same nest, enabling a more realistic substitution pattern by upholding the IIA
structure for the alternatives in the same nest, but not between the nests.
As stated in (Rich and Mabit 2019), an important consideration in transport modelling is the
choice of destination. Just like the choice of transport mode, the choice of destination can be
modelled as a discrete choice. For this thesis, a joint estimation of destination and mode is used.
The model structure is constituted by a nested logit model, with destination on the upper level.
The utility function for a nested logit model consists of two deterministic terms and two error
terms, as seen in Equation 4. The indirect utility is described by both Vm|j, being the indirect
utility travelling with mode m to destination j, and Vj, being the indirect utility travelling to
destination j. The indirect utility for destination is described in Equation 5, and as displayed in
the equation, it is assumed to be dependent on the number of workplaces and population in the
zone. To not include any scale eﬀects, the logarithm of the values are used. The indirect utility
associated with the term Vm|j, is as discribed in Equation 5.
Um,j = Vj + Vm|j + εj + εm|j
(4)
Vj = βEmp · log(Empj) + βP op · log(Popj)
(5)
Equation 6 entails how the joint probability of choosing mode and destination, Pm,j, is obtained
by multiplying the probability of choosing destination, Pj, with the probability of choosing mode,
given the destination, Pm|j. The two separate probabilities are calculated by the two factors on the
right hand side of Equation 6. The equation for the Ij term, called the inclusive utility or logsum,
is shown in Equation 7. The logsum parameter, µj, measure the degree of similarity within a nest.
Pm,j = Pm|j · Pj =
exp(Vm|j)
P
m′ exp(Vm|j) ·
exp(Vj + Ij)
P
j′ exp(Vj′ + Ij′)
(6)
Ij = µjlog
X
m′ exp
Vm′|j
µj

(7)
There is extensive literature regarding mode choice models. For the purpose of this thesis,
a handful of papers regarding bicycles or bicycle infrastructure have been reviewed. Despite the
similar area of research, the reviewed papers show varying modelling applications and research
objectives. Examples of this is found in (Rayaprolu et al. 2018; Abdul Aziz et al. 2018; Song, Pre-
ston, and Ogilvie 2017). All three papers assesses the mode shift due to new bicycle infrastructure,
but applies diﬀerent types of models. (Rayaprolu et al. 2018) uses a multinomial and nested logit
25
==PAGE:27==
models, while (Song et al. 2017) uses a binary logit model and (Abdul Aziz et al. 2018) uses a
multinomial logit model and subsequently modiﬁes the probabilities by letting agents who share
the same household or workplace location interact and aﬀect each others probabilities.
Diﬀerences in modelling applications also regards to the focus on certain trip types, e.g. com-
mute trips in (Rayaprolu et al. 2018; Heinen et al. 2017; Pinjari et al. 2011), or the aﬀect from
built environment, e.g. population density (Amir et al. 2016; Pinjari et al. 2011; T. A. S. Nielsen,
Olafsson, et al. 2013). To account for more complex decision structures, a model using joint es-
timation of household location, car ownership, bicycle ownership and commute mode is found in
(Pinjari et al. 2011), while a latent-lifestyle and mode choice model for short distances is estimated
in (Prato, Halld´orsd´ottir, and Anker Nielsen 2017).
4.1.2
Model Description
For this project, the choice between ﬁve modes has been modelled; walk, bike, car driver, car
passenger and public transport. This section presents the model structure with regards to how
diﬀerent bike types have been included, as well as the used model speciﬁcation.
Due to the lack of data regarding journeys with e-bikes and speed pedelec, the choice of bike
type does not explicitly enter the model. Instead, the three types of bikes considered in the study;
regular bicycle, e-bike and speed pedelec, are modelled as one mode.
To account for the fact
that the travel time diﬀers between the bike types, due to the diﬀerence in potential speed, the
travel time entering the model for bike is a weighted average of the three types. To also account
for heterogeneity in biking speed between individuals, three diﬀerent speed types are used; slow,
medium and fast. For simplicity, each bicycle type is assumed to have the same division of speed
types, the types are decided by 25th, 50th and 75th percentile from cross-sectional speed data.
Refer to Section 4.2 for more detailed description of speed analysis.
The travel time for travelling between zone i and j by bike is a weighted sum over both the bike
types and the speed types, as shown in Equation 8. The weights for bike type, wq, corresponds to
the values in Mix1 and the weights for speed type, wr, corresponds to the percentiles, i.e. slow has
a weight of 25%, medium 50% and fast 25%. A ﬁgure showing the structure of the choice model
can be seen in Figure 4. Note that the shading of all other modes is an attempt to emphasize the
focus on bike in this report.
TravelTimen,Bike(j|i) =
X
q
X
s
tqs(j|i) · wq · ws
(8)
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4: Framework for mode choice model
Time and Cost Variables
Two alternative speciﬁc variables have been used, travel time and travel cost (i.e. monetary cost).
In order to not face any identiﬁcation problem, due to the often high correlation, the travel time
and travel cost for each mode have been merged to a generalized travel time. The generalized
travel time GTTnm(j|i), for individual n travelling from zone i to zone j by mode m, is calculated
as in Equation 9. For walk, bike and car passenger, the travel cost is assumed to be zero. For
car driver and public transport, the travel time and travel cost have been taken from the Danish
National Transport Model, Landstraﬁksmodellen (LTM) (DTU Transport n.d.[a]).
GTTn,m (j|i) = TravelTimen,m (j|i) + TravelCostn,m (j|i)
(9)
The travel cost term for car driver is calculated as in Equation 10.
The two ﬁrst factors
constitutes the monetary cost, which is obtained by multiplying the distance Dcar with a ﬁxed
kilometer-price of driving a car, Pcar. The ﬁxed price is set to 0.9 DKK per kilometer, it in-
corporates the cost for fuel and wear of tires, and has been taken from the unit prices used in
socio-economic appraisals for transport projects in Denmark (DTU Transport n.d.[b]). The value-
of-time V oTg(n), is based on previously made studies and diﬀers over income groups, refer to Table
A2 in Appendix B. The indicator variable in,g, indicates whether individual n belongs to group
g. Note that the chosen methodology of a generalised travel time and not generalised travel cost,
reﬂects the assumption of the declining importance of cost for higher wealth. Hence, the value-
of-time factor can be seen as a cost-deﬂation factor, and when increased, causes the travel cost to
decrease. Simultaneously it puts more emphasis on travel time and increases the demand due to
lower generalised travel time. A more elaborated discussion regarding this is found in (Rich and
Mabit 2019).
TravelCostn,car (j|i) = Dcar (j|i) · Pcar
"X
g
in,g
V oTg
#
(10)
The travel cost for public transport has been calculated according to Equation 11 and incorpo-
rates the same segmentation of value-of-time as for car. The cost for public transport have been
calculated by using an indicator variable ln,t, which indicates weather individual n belong to ticket
group t. The ticket groups have been used in order to account for diﬀerent ticket prices and was
27
==PAGE:29==
created with information from TU data. In total, ﬁve ticket groups were used; three education
segments (primary, secondary and higher), commuter cards and regular tickets.
TravelCostn,pub (j|i) =
X
t
ln,t · Pt (j|i)
"X
g
in,g
V oTg
#
(11)
The travel time for both car and public transport has been calculated as weighted a sum of
diﬀerent time segments e.g. free-ﬂow travel time and congestion time. Speciﬁed as in (Rich and
Hansen 2016). The weights are seen in Equation 12 & 13 and have been taken from LTM (DTU
Transport n.d.[a]). For simplicity, the notation (j|i) have been dropped.
TravelTimen,car = 1 · FreeFlow + 1.5 · CongTime + 1 · ArrPreDep
+ 0.3 · FerryWaitTime + 0.8 · FerryTravelTime
(12)
TravelTimen,pub = 1 · InV ehicleTime + 6 · NoOfChanges + 1.5 · WaitTime
+ 1.5 · WalkTime + 1 · EarlyDep + 1.5 · LongWaitTime
(13)
It should be noted that the travel time and travel cost for public transport and car are the same
in all scenarios. This means that no future eﬀects on travel cost or time from other infrastruc-
ture projects or ﬁscal policies are considered. Furthermore, the possible eﬀects of reduced traﬃc
congestion due to more bicycle use are not taken into consideration.
Socio-economic and Other Variables
The socio-economic variables included in the model were presented in Table 3 and include e.g
gender, age, labour market connection and family situation. The other variables which have been
in included are trip purpose, seasonal eﬀects, distance to nearest transit station in origin and
destination zone and population density for origin zone. The trip purpose have been segmented in
ﬁve groups; commute, education, escort, shopping and leisure. Seasonal eﬀects have been group
into three; winter (November - February), spring/autumn (March - May, September - October)
and summer (June - August). To not include any scale eﬀects, the distance to nearest transit
stations and population density are included with a logarithmic transformation.
Sampling
To reduce the computational power needed to estimate the above presented nested logit model, the
full data frame for 53 000 observations with ﬁve modes and 258 destinations would result in a table
with around 70 million rows, two sampling strategies were tested. The ﬁrst strategy consisted of
sampling a chosen number of observations, and for each observation, sample a chosen number of
destination. This strategy could, however, only be executed for a small number of observations and
zones, for 10 000 observations and 60 zones a result was not obtained after 36 hours of computation.
The second strategy consisted of sampling 60 zones and estimating a model on the observations
having any of the 60 zones as destination. It should be noted that the ﬁrst sampling strategy is
preferred due to the inclusion of all zones in the estimation. The strategy was however discarded
due to the long estimation time.
To reduce the bias towards the 60 sampled zones, ten models on diﬀerent samples where es-
timated. The speciﬁcation of the models were determined by testing on three of the samples,
testing refers to the process of sequentially eliminating insigniﬁcant parameters to obtain a ﬁnal
speciﬁcation. The speciﬁcation yielded similar results in terms of signiﬁcant parameters for the
three models, and thus used for the estimation on all ten samples. The resulting parameters can be
seen in Section 5.1. To account for the uncertainty of the parameters, the 90%-conﬁdence interval
was calculated and have been used in a sensitivity analysis.
28
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Route Assignment
Route choice models describe the demand side of a traﬃc assignment problem, i.e. estimate the
use of links in the network, while the supply side is described by a capacity constraint given by
a speed-ﬂow relationship. The traﬃc assignment is used to calculate travel time between zones
and to assign traﬃc to the network. Just like a mode choice model, a route choice model can be
based on a random utility framework, assuming individuals choosing the route giving the highest
utility. As stated in (Rich and Mabit 2019), route choice model are rarely estimated due to the cost
of data collection, and the lack of guidance regarding how to subset the number of alternatives,
which often are inﬁnite. Assignment models are often classiﬁed into four groups; all-or-nothing,
user equilibrium, stochastic user model and stochastic user equilibrium.
The classes diﬀer in
terms of how they incorporate the individuals’ knowledge regarding the fastest route and capacity
constraints in the network (Rich and Mabit 2019).
The literature regarding cyclists’ preferences for route choices are quite well-researched. A re-
vealed preference study, with data from the Copenhagen area, (Prato, Halld´orsd´ottir, and O. A.
Nielsen 2018) ﬁnds that routes including left or right turns are both perceived as detours. Fur-
thermore, the same study ﬁnds that routes that are shorter and less steep are preferred. These
three ﬁndings are also seen in a GPS-base route choice model from San Francisco (Hood, Sall,
and Charlton 2011). Diﬀerent types of bike infrastructure also have an aﬀect on the choice of
routes, e.g. bicycle lanes and paths are favourable (Prato, Halld´orsd´ottir, and O. A. Nielsen 2018).
(Ziemke, Metzler, and Nagel 2017) make use of a height model, surface attribute and a categoriza-
tion of infrastructure e.g. highway, lane or track, are used. In (Ehrgott et al. 2012), a bi-objective
route choice model is developed, the two objectives are travel time and a suitability measure. The
suitability measure is created for each link and is based on 20 factors, e.g. motor traﬃc volume,
motor traﬃc speed, road gradient and presence of bicycle infrastructure.
4.2.1
Model Description
The assignment model used for this project is an all-or-nothing fastest path model. It should be
noted that this is a simpliﬁcation with regards to both the capacity of bicycle lanes and the choice
of route, but is deemed as suﬃcient. Furthermore, the use can be supported by ﬁndings in (Paulsen
and Nagel 2019), where it is shown that the overall level of congestion in the bicycle network of
Capital Region of Denmark is as low as 1% in terms of travel time, even though speciﬁc parts of
the network might suﬀer from higher levels. Moreover, a reason for using the fastest path is the
previously mentioned problem of estimating a route choice model, and is deemed out of the scope
for this project. Findings in (Menghini et al. 2010; Prato, Halld´orsd´ottir, and O. A. Nielsen 2018)
reveal that direct and shorter routes are preferred, indicating that travel time reduction can be
assumed to be a main objective for cyclists. Note that no height model have been included, hence
no speed reductions for inclinations are considered.
The travel time for bike, TravelTimeBike(j|i), is the one which minimizes the total travel time
for all links, lij, belonging to fastest path between the origin zone i and destination zone j, as as seen
in Equation 14. Note that dl and vl is the length, respectively speed, for link l. The intra-zone travel
time is assumed to be half of the travel time to the closest zone. To incorporate the waiting time
at signalized intersections and roundabouts, a waiting time of 30 seconds, respectively 5 seconds,
is added if the link is part of a signalized intersection or roundabout. This is represented by Wl
in the equation. The waiting times has been added by ﬁnding links which spatially intersects with
intersection polygons, the polygons have been taken from the coming traﬃc model for Copenhagen,
COMPASS (MOE Tetraplan n.d.). The same waiting time have been added independently of how
the intersection is crossed, meaning that going straight, to the right or to the left all inﬂict 30
seconds. In reality, the waiting time to make a left turn is sometime double due to the need of
crossing two times.
29
==PAGE:31==
TravelTimeBike(j|i) = min
X
lij
dlij
vlij + Wlij
(14)
Figure 5 displays how the route assignment have been implemented over three dimensions;
network, cyclist type and bicycle type. The diﬀerent dimensions relates to their assumed eﬀect on
travelling speed for a cyclist. The four diﬀerent networks refers to the ones presented in Table 5.
Cyclist type refers to that the travelling speed for cyclists varies over the population and bicycle
type refers to the higher travelling speeds for e-bikes and speed pedelecs. By combining the three
dimensions and their division, a total of 36 assignments are run.
Figure 5: Thematic ﬁgure over the parts of route choice assignment
4.2.2
Speed
As indicated in (Eriksson et al. 2019; Schleinitz et al. 2017), the existence of improved bicycle
infrastructure might lead to higher travelling speed for cyclists.
Improved should in this case
be understood as e.g. separation from other types of traﬃc, improved surface, prioritization in
at intersections or widening. The question regarding increased speed on cycle superhighways is
investigated in a Dutch master thesis by (Houkes 2019). The results indicate that electric bikes
ride with signiﬁcantly higher speeds between cities connected by cycle superhighways. The results
are, however, relatively uncertain since the data used in the analysis is not actual speed data, but
rather individual travel times between cities.
To assign speeds to the network, the speed data presented in Section 3 have been used together
with literary references. Due to few observations and unrealistically high values of average speed on
shared bicycle infrastructure, the observations from locations categorized as shared infrastructure
was discarded. Instead, the assumption that the speed diﬀerence between shared infrastructure and
dedicated infrastructure is equal to the diﬀerence between the dedicated infrastructure and cycle
superhighway infrastructure, was made. In total, more than one million speed observations was
included in the analysis. It should be noted that the observations for a location have been collected
during time frames spanning from 4-21 days and includes cyclists going both directions. No weather
data have been collected for the actual dates, hence, no correction of wind or precipitation can
be made.
Since the measurements have been taken during several days, this should, however,
have a neglectable impact.
The daily repeated measurement does, nonetheless, bring the fact
that the same individual might have been observed several times. Summary statistics from the
measurements can be seen in Table 7. A one-sided ANOVA-test indicates that the speeds are
diﬀerent on a 99%-level.
Table 7: Summary statistics of speed observations [km/h]
Category
Average
Std.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Max
Obs
Cycle Superhighway
19.56
4.15
16.60
19.30
22.50
29.90
333985
Dedicated
18.10
4.16
15.10
17.80
20.80
29.90
668621
30
==PAGE:32==
Looking at the distribution of the speed data, seen as a density plot in Figure 6, it is obvious
that the bicycle speed is heterogeneous within the population. Similar results, i.e. a bell-shaped
curve for the speed distribution, are found in (Paulsen, Rasmussen, and Nielsen 2019; Rossi et al.
2017). The estimated average speed presented in Table 7 are within range of previous reported
ﬁndings. In (Paulsen, Rasmussen, et al. 2019), an average travelling speed of 6.29 m/s (∼22.6
km/h) is reported, (Bernardi and Rupi 2015) report average speeds ranging between 14.6 - 18.9
km/h in Bologna, and in their review regarding reported average speed for bicycles, (Bonham and
Johnson 2015), reports surprisingly high average speeds, ranging between 19.5 - 23.3 km/h. The
speed for the three cyclist types, on respectively bicycle infrastructure, are given from Table 7,
where Q1 corresponds to the slow cyclist type, and Q2 and Q3 corresponds to medium and fast,
respectively.
Figure 6: Density plot for speed on cycle superhighways and dedicated biking infrastructure
Due to the lack of available data regarding travelling speed for the diﬀerent bike types, no such
analysis have been performed. Instead, diﬀerences between bike types from other studies have been
used to calculate the travelling speed for e-bikes and speed pedelecs. In a study from Germany
(Schleinitz et al. 2017), naturalistic data from 90 participants using their own bikes were assessed
to investigate the diﬀerence in travelling speed for regular bikes, e-bikes and speed pedelecs. On
average, the speed diﬀerence between regular bikes compared to e-bikes and speed pedelecs are 2
km/h, respectively 9 km/h. It should be noted that the reported average speed for all three types
of bikes are comparably low; 15.3 km/h for regular bikes, 17.4 km/h for e-bikes and 24.5 km/h
for speed pedelecs. As comparison, study from Belgium using data from 40 persons ﬁnds a mean
speed for speed pedelecs of 37 km/h (Rotthier et al. 2017).
The used speeds are presented in Table 8. To clarify how the values in the table have been
calculated, an example using the fast cyclist type is exaplained in the following text. First, the
values for regular bike on cycle superhighway and dedicated infrastructure are obtained from Table
7 in the Q3-row. The speed on shared infrastructure is calculated by assuming the same speed
diﬀerence between all three types of infrastructure, hence, 20.8 −(22.5 −20.8) = 19.1. The speed
for e-bike and speed pedelec is thereafter calculated by adding 2 km/h, respectively 9 km/h, for
each infrastructure type. The speed for medium and slow cyclist type can be deduced in the same
way by using Q2 or Q1 from Table 7.
31
==PAGE:33==
Table 8: Table over speed in the network, depending on infrastructure, bicycle
type and cyclist type
Cyclist Type
Bike Type
Infrastructure Type
Cycle Superhighway
Dedicated
Shared
Fast
Speed pedelec
31.5
29.8
27.3
E-bike
24.5
22.8
21.1
Reg. bike
22.5
20.8
19.1
Medium
Speed pedelec
28.3
26.8
25.3
E-bike
21.3
19.8
18.3
Reg. bike
19.3
17.8
16.3
Slow
Speed pedelec
25.6
24.1
22.6
E-bike
18.6
17.1
15.6
Reg. bike
16.6
15.1
13.6
4.3
Model Application
As presented in the introduction of Section 4, the model application refers to the Predictive model-
side in Figure 2. The model have been applied on four networks, one base and three scenarios,
and nine diﬀerent mixes of market share for bikes, resulting in 36 combinations. Due to the many
combinations and variables used, a summary of all notations is found in the nomenclature on the
last page of the report.
By applying the estimated choice model in a scenario and mix, the probability P SM
nijm for each
observation n, travelling from zone i to zone j by mode m, is obtained. To obtain aggregated results
on a zone level from the probabilities, the probabilities are summed over individuals as described in
Equation 15. The possibility of summing the individual probabilities in order to obtain aggregated
results is a property of logit models (Rich and Mabit 2019). The bTijm hence describes the estimated
number of observations travelling from zone i to zone j by mode m. Equation 16 deﬁnes the total
number of observations travelling with mode m, hence, constituting the market share for that
mode. The use of a circumﬂex, b, is to denote that these ﬁgures are obtained from the model. The
distance travelled by each mode is obtained by multiplying the individual probability with with
the distance, dS
ijm, between zone i and j by mode m, seen in Equation 17. The superscript for the
distance indicates that it is dependent of scenario, which is only valid for bike, all other distances is
constant throughout the scenarios. The average distance travelled is given by Equation 18, where
the total distance travelled by each mode m is divided with the total number of observations
choosing mode m.
bT SM
ijm =
X
n
P SM
nijm
(15)
bT SM
m
=
X
i
X
j
X
n
P SM
nijm
(16)
bDSM
m
=
X
i
X
j
X
n
P SM
nijm · dS
ijm
(17)
d
AD
SM
m
=
bDSM
m
bT SM
m
(18)
4.3.1
Pivoting
Even though the observational data (TU data) can be considered as representative for the popula-
tion, the model needs to be calibrated to actual observed behaviour (Rich and Mabit 2019). To do
32
==PAGE:34==
this, model pivoting is applied. Model pivoting is a methodology where the modelling application
is only used in a relative sense. Since the analysis is limited to bikes, the pivoting have not been
applied for any of the other four modes, and the notation for mode has therefore been dropped in
the following equations. The pivoting is shown in Equation 19, where T Obs
ij
is observed travel data
describing the number of trips between each zone-pair, data from LTM for the year 2019 have been
used. The equation also displays the meaning of only using the model application in a relative
sense, where the predicted real travel matrix, T SM
ij
, is given by the marginal change between the
predict model observations for the scenario bT SM
ij
, and the predicted model observations in the base
bT 01
ij . Note the notation of bT 01
ij , which displays the use of the base network, labelled by, 0, and Mix
1 as base.
T SM
ij
= T Obs
ij
·
bT SM
ij
bT 01
ij
(19)
It should be noted that the problem of expanding the data to allow for all combinations of
mode and destination, as described in the in the estimation of the model, was encountered also in
the application phase. For the application, the strategy of sampling 60 zones for each observation,
i.e. all observations, was computational feasible and therefore used. The sampling of zones for each
observation was done once, and are the same for each application of the model. This is to reduce
the risk of noise entering the results due to diﬀerent sampled zones. The advantage of sampling
60 zones for each observation is the low risk of not including any of the 258 zones for any of the
observations.
4.3.2
Consumer Surplus
Consumer surplus is a value of the net-beneﬁt coming from an action. The calculations compare
a do-nothing scenario with a do-something scenario. For this report, the base network, i.e already
existing bicycle network, is considered the do-nothing scenario, while the expansion of cycle super-
highway network is considered the do-something scenario. Moreover, there is an extra dimension
due to the changing of bicycles mix. Using this dimension, one have to consider if the adaptation
of e-bikes and speed pedelecs is aﬀected by the expansion of the cycle superhighways. If no aﬀect
is assumed, the same mix needs to be applied in the scenario and in the base. To also include
the fact that an expansion of the cycle superhighway network could have an impact on the use
of e-bike and speed pedelecs, calculations have been performed with both the same and varying
mixes. Calculations with lower mix on a scenario network than on the base network have, however,
not been performed.
To limit the aggregation bias, the consumer surplus is calculated at the most disaggregate
level, being per speed and bicycle type for each zone-pair. For each scenario and mix, this was
accomplished by multiplying the total number of trips for each zone-pair, T SM
ij
, with two weights;
wq for bicycle type and ws for speed type, seen in Equation 20. The weight wq corresponds to the
assumed market shares for each mix, while weights for ws are constant. The share of bicycle types
have assume to be the same between all zone pairs, meaning that it is not distance dependent.
This could have been incorporated by assigning diﬀerent weights for the bicycle types, pending on
the distance between the zones, and hence, attempting to capture the eﬀect of e-bikes and speed
pedelecs travelling longer distances. This has, however, not been included due to time constraints.
T SM
ijqs = T SM
ij
· wSM
q
· wSM
s
(20)
The consumer surplus is thereafter calculated by Equation 21. The equation stems from what
is known as ”the-rule-of-the-half”, where previous users obtain the full beneﬁts from travel time
33
==PAGE:35==
savings and new users obtain half of the beneﬁts (Rich and Mabit 2019). The travel time between
zones i and j, for bike type q and speed type s is described by tijqs. The zero superscript for the
negative term reﬂects that the travel time for the scenario is always compared to the travel time
in the base. The MS and Mb for consumer surplus describes the assumed mix in the scenario,
respectively base.
CSSMSMb
ijqs
= (T SM
ijqs + T Obs
ijqs) · (tS
ijqs −t0
ijqs)
2
(21)
Since the time is measured in minutes and the T Obs
ijm are daily trip patterns, the value obtained
in Equation 21 is converted to a montery value per year. The conversion is seen in Equation 22,
where the consumer surplus on the most disaggregated level is multiplied with a value-of-time
factor and number of days. Since no full assessment is performed, an assumed average value-of-
time of 90 DKK per hour is used. A discussions regarding the value-of-time for cyclists and how
to incorporate it in project assessments is found in (B¨orjesson and Eliasson 2011). The number of
days have been set to 250. Equation 22 also indicates how the total consumer surplus is obtained
by summing over speed type, bicycle type, destination zone and origin zone.
CSSMSMb =
X
i
X
j
X
q
X
s

CSSMSMb
ijqs
· V oT
60
· ndays

(22)
34
==PAGE:36==
35
==PAGE:37==
5
Results
This section presents results for the estimated destination and mode choice model, together with
an overview of the results from the model application. An in-depth analysis for a subset of the
results is presented in a case study in Section 6.
5.1
Destination and Mode Choice Model
The result from the ten estimated models is displayed in Table 9. Reported in the table are the
estimates mean, standard deviation and 90%-conﬁdence interval over the ten estimated models-
The 90%-conﬁdence interval have been calculated assuming a t-distribution. Furthermore, the
highest p-value of the parameter for any of the models is reported, as well as the number of times
the parameter was insigniﬁcant at the 95%-level. In several of the models, µ ≥1, indicating that
the substitution patterns between the modes are similar independent of destination, Therefore, µ
has been set to 1 in the calculations, simplifying the model to a multinomial logit model.
Table 9: Variable estimates for the choice model
Variable
Mean
Std. Dev.
CI-low
CI-high
P-value
(max.)
(≥0.05)
Generalized travel time
GenTT - Bike
-0.068
0.007
-0.072
-0.063
0.000
0
GenTT - Walk
-0.051
0.004
-0.053
-0.049
0.000
0
GenTT - Car/Public transport
-0.041
0.005
-0.043
-0.038
0.000
0
Nest coeﬃcient
µ
1.089
0.100
1.031
1.147
0.000
0
Socio-economic
Female - Walk
0.415
0.072
0.373
0.457
0.000
0
Female - Bike
0.427
0.068
0.388
0.467
0.000
0
Female - Car passenger
1.239
0.093
1.185
1.293
0.000
0
Female - Public transport
0.593
0.073
0.551
0.635
0.000
0
Normalization: Male - Car
0
Age (29-43) - Car passenger
-0.242
0.057
-0.275
-0.209
0.136
3
Age (29-43) - Public transport
-0.326
0.071
-0.368
-0.285
0.076
1
Age (44-57) - Public transport
-0.271
0.083
-0.319
-0.223
0.275
3
Normalization: Age (10-28) - Car
0
Student - Walk
1.012
0.107
0.950
1.074
0.000
0
Student - Bike
1.469
0.100
1.411
1.528
0.000
0
Student - Car passenger
2.044
0.135
1.966
2.123
0.000
0
Student - Public transport
0.986
0.157
0.895
1.077
0.000
0
Retired - Public transport
0.510
0.173
0.410
0.610
0.122
1
Unemployed - Public transport
0.691
0.164
0.596
0.787
0.137
2
Other out of job - Walk
0.476
0.172
0.377
0.576
0.135
2
Other out of job - Public transport
0.899
0.211
0.777
1.022
0.088
1
Normalization: Full-time employee - Car
0
Couple - Bike
0.198
0.063
0.162
0.234
0.461
1
Couple - Car passenger
0.726
0.106
0.664
0.787
0.000
0
Couple w. child - Bike
0.360
0.072
0.318
0.401
0.000
0
Couple w. child - Car passenger
0.685
0.097
0.629
0.741
0.000
0
Normalization: Single - Car
0
Househcar=1 - Walk
-2.507
0.112
-2.572
-2.443
0.000
0
Househcar=1 - Bike
-2.839
0.111
-2.904
-2.775
0.000
0
Househcar=1 - Car passenger
-1.812
0.182
-1.918
-1.707
0.000
0
Househcar=1 - Public transport
-3.383
0.183
-3.489
-3.277
0.000
0
Househcar=2 - Walk
-3.143
0.102
-3.202
-3.084
0.000
0
Househcar=2 - Bike
-3.739
0.110
-3.802
-3.675
0.000
0
Househcar=2 Car passenger
-2.402
0.165
-2.497
-2.306
0.000
0
Househcar=2 - Public transport
-4.467
0.231
-4.602
-4.333
0.000
0
Normalization: HousehCar=0 Car
0
Trip Purpose
Commute - Walk
-2.224
0.175
-2.325
-2.122
0.000
0
Commute - Bike
0.229
0.117
0.161
0.297
0.452
1
Commute - Car passenger
-1.772
0.117
-1.840
-1.704
0.000
0
36
==PAGE:38==
Commute - Public transport
0.708
0.166
0.611
0.804
0.000
0
Education - Bike
1.306
0.167
1.210
1.403
0.000
0
Education - Car passenger
-0.730
0.270
-0.887
-0.574
0.228
1
Education - Public transport
1.527
0.137
1.447
1.606
0.000
0
Escort - Walk
-1.276
0.165
-1.371
-1.180
0.000
0
Escort - Bike
-0.942
0.093
-0.996
-0.888
0.000
0
Escort - Car passenger
-1.691
0.194
-1.804
-1.578
0.000
0
Escort - Public transport
-2.149
0.472
-2.423
-1.875
0.000
0
Shopping - Walk
-0.555
0.109
-0.619
-0.492
0.000
0
Shopping - Bike
-0.469
0.103
-0.528
-0.409
0.000
0
Shopping - Car passenger
-0.529
0.073
-0.571
-0.487
0.000
0
Shopping - Public transport
-1.033
0.202
-1.150
-0.915
0.000
0
Normalization: Leisure Car
0
Other
log(PopDensityOrigin) - Walk
0.431
0.060
0.396
0.466
0.000
0
log(PopDensityOrigin) - Bike
0.144
0.043
0.119
0.169
0.003
0
Normalization: Car
0
log(DistStationOrig) - Public transport
-0.112
0.034
-0.131
-0.092
0.206
2
log(DistStationDest) - Public transport
-0.338
0.076
-0.383
-0.294
0.000
0
Normalization: Car
0
Spring/Autumn - Bike
0.371
0.063
0.335
0.408
0.000
0
Summer - Bike
0.524
0.065
0.486
0.561
0.000
0
Normalization: Winter - Bike
0
Alternative-speciﬁc constants
ASC - Walk
1.732
0.593
1.388
2.076
0.000
0
ASC - Bike
2.123
0.563
1.796
2.449
0.000
0
ASC - Car passenger
-1.613
0.222
-1.741
-1.485
0.000
0
ASC - Public transport
2.519
0.163
2.425
2.614
0.000
0
Log-likelihood
-50 517 – -36 726
Numer of observations
10 216 – 13 578
It is not straight-forward to compare the size of parameters between diﬀerent studies, instead
signs and internal comparison can give an indication whether the ﬁndings are similar to what has
been reported before. The female parameters indicate a higher propensity to use all other modes
than being the car driver, this is similar to ﬁndings in (Jensen and Christensen 2008). For age
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in cycling or car driver is found between the used age groups. This is
opposite of ﬁndings from the UK in (Wardman, Tight, and Page 2007), a possible explanation
might be the diﬀerence in cycling culture and high-quality bike infrastructure between Denmark
and the UK. Students are more likely to use bike, and all other modes, than car compared to
full-time employees. For other labour groups, there is higher probability of using public transport
than car, compared to full-time employees. Having one car in the household compare to having
none, decreases the probability of using all other modes. The eﬀect of having two cars is larger,
but the marginal eﬀect of acquire an additional car is smaller.
The probability of using bicycle is higher on both commute trips or trips to education facility,
compared to using car on a leisure trip. The eﬀect on a trip to education is larger, which coincides
with the ﬁndings previously noted regarding students and employees. The opposite can be seen for
escorting or shopping trips. Built environment variables indicate higher use of bicycles compared to
car in more densely populated areas, similar to the ﬁndings in (T. A. S. Nielsen and Skov-Petersen
2018), where binomial logit model indicates higher probability to bike in more urban areas. The
aversion for distance to public transport station is indicated to be larger for the destination zone
than for origin zone. Season variables can be seen as proxy variables for weather, where both
spring/autumn and summer indicates higher use of bikes.
Elasticities
Having two choices explicitly entering the choice model, elasticities can be calculated separately.
For the choice of mode, the elasticity measure the marginal change in market share for each mode,
given a marginal change in one of the independent variables. For the choice of destination, the
37
==PAGE:39==
actual destination is not of primary interest, but rather the distance to the chosen destination, i.e.
what is the marginal change in the average distance travelled, given an marginal change in one of
the independent variables. The elasticities are presented in Table 10 and are denoted by η, where
the superscript entails the changed variable. The calculations have been performed using a 20%
increase in three of the independent variables; car cost(CC), car travel time(CT) and bike travel
time(BT). Also presented in table are the predicted market shares and average distances in the
base.
Table 10: Mode and distance elasticities for car cost, car travel time and bike travel time. All
simulated by an 20% increase. CC = car cost, CT = car travel time, BT = bike time.
Mode
Average Distance
Base [%]
ηCC
ηCT
ηBT
Base [km]
ηCC
ηCT
ηBT
Walk
11.1
0.100
0.232
0.423
3.7
0.015
0.036
0.056
Bike
22.2
0.155
0.358
-1.140
8.0
0.037
0.087
-0.720
Car driver
42.2
-0.278
-0.219
0.238
30.7
-0.264
-0.223
-0.057
Car passenger
11.9
0.430
-0.559
0.287
48.4
0.064
-0.268
-0.066
Public transport
12.6
0.164
0.426
0.567
18.9
0.045
0.150
-0.070
Generally, the direct mode shift elasticities here are higher than what has been reported in
(Jovicic and Hansen 2003), which reports a direct car cost elasticity of -0.11, compared to -0.278
here, in (Jensen et al. 2008), which reports a direct car travel time elasticity of -0.12, compared
to -0.219 here, and a direct bicycle travel time elasticity of -1, compared to -1.14 here. No single
reason for the higher elasticity reported in this study can easily be identiﬁed, one of them might be
the use of a ﬁxed value-of-time and the use of a generalized travel time variable. The substitution
patterns indicated by the elasticities does, however, entail a previously reported pattern where car
and car passenger are substituted against each other while walk, bike and public transported are
substituted against each other (Rietveld and Daniel n.d.). This is most apparent in the mode shift
elasticities from bicycle time, column ηBT .
The average distance elasticities with respect to car cost and car travel time decribes similar
patterns as the mode elasticities.
The average distance elasticities with respect to bike time
does, however, indicate a diverging pattern. The fact that the cross-elasticities for car driver, car
passenger and public transport are negatiev is perhaps counter-intuitive, but it should be noted
that the total distance travelled by these modes increase. Due to the simultaneous mode shift to
car driver, car passenger and public transport, which is marginally larger than the total distance
increase, the average distance is actually lowered. This comes from that bike trips are most often
shorter than for these modes, and when substituted for another mode, more short trips are being
done by car, car passenger or public transport, hence lowering the average distance. The opposite
can be seen for walk.
5.2
Forecasting
As stated in Section 4.3, the choice model have been applied for four networks, one base and three
scenarios, and nine mixes. To limit the repetition of similar results, the ﬁgures presented in this
section mainly focuses on the ﬁnal results obtained for Scenario 3, being the fully extent network
planned to be constructed around the year of 2045. Selected results for Scenario 1 & 2 can be found
in appendix. More in-depth analysis and comparisons between the diﬀerent scenarios are described
in a case study in Section 6. The notations used here are equal to what has been presented before,
refer to the nomenclature on the last page for a summary of all notations.
38
==PAGE:40==
5.2.1
Number of bicycle trips
The estimated total number of bicycle trips, given in thousands, for all scenarios and mixes are
shown in Table 11. The ﬁgures mostly follow the intuition and expected results of increasing number
of trips along higher mix and scenario. Note that these ﬁgures describe all bicycle trips, independent
of bicycle type, and corresponds to the pivoted real travel matrix, T SM
m
. A noteworthy result are
the results for Mix3 and Mix4. The results are diﬀerent on a zone-level but on an aggregated level,
they show almost identical results. With Mix3 and Mix5 having 10%, respectively 25% e-bikes
and 5%, respectively 0.5% speed pedelecs, this indicates the fact speed pedelecs are able to utilize
more of the potential on better bicycle infrastructure, and thus, can compensate for a lower level
of e-bikes. This is also seen for Mix6 and Mix7, where Mix6 predict higher shares than Mix7. The
numbers predict a total number of bike trips in the range of 1,10 - 1,24 million trips when the full
network have been implemented.
Table 11: The total number of bicycle trips (all bicycle types), T SM
Bike, on base and
scenario networks for all mixes. [103]
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Base (0)
1,046
1,053
1,075
1,075
1,098
1,125
1,114
1,139
1,170
Scenario 1
1,052
1,060
1,082
1,082
1,105
1,133
1,121
1,147
1,178
Scenario 2
1,073
1,081
1,103
1,103
1,128
1,156
1,144
1,171
1,204
Scenario 3
1,092
1,101
1,125
1,125
1,151
1,182
1,169
1,199
1,235
Table 12 displays a comparison of the ﬁgures for the base network and Scenario 3 seen in Table
11, meaning that the marginal increase is calculated between each mix-pair. As an example, the
most extreme case where the assumed current mix on the base network, Mix1, is compared to Mix9
on Scenario 3 network, have been calculated as in Equation 23. The results are intuitive in the
sense that if extending the network of cycle superhighways have a positive eﬀect on the use e-bikes
and speed pedelecs, i.e. the mix is higher on the scenario network than on the base network, the
marginal increase in number of trips will be higher. Corresponding tables for Scenario 1 & 2 are
found in Appendix C in Tables A4 - A5
∆= T 39
Bike −T 01
Bike
T 01
Bike
= 1, 235 −1, 046
1, 046
= 0.1809
(23)
Table 12: The percentage increase in number of bicycle trips between base
network and Scenario 3 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
4.48
5.29
7.62
7.61
10.09
13.08
11.82
14.64
18.09
Mix2
4.53
6.84
6.82
9.29
12.26
11.01
13.81
17.23
Mix3
4.69
4.67
7.09
10.00
8.77
11.52
14.87
Mix4
4.68
7.10
10.00
8.77
11.52
14.87
Mix5
4.86
7.71
6.51
9.20
12.48
Mix6
5.11
3.94
6.56
9.77
Mix7
4.98
7.63
10.87
Mix8
5.23
8.39
Mix9
5.56
The predicted market shares for bike, for all scenarios and mixes are presented in Table 13.
The ﬁgures correspond to the predicted market share for bike, bT SM
Bike. The table follow a similar
structure and deviance as in Table 11, that being increasing for higher scenarios and mixes. Table
14 displays the marginal change between the market shares on the the base network and on the
Scenario 3 network, which have been calculated equivalently to Equation 23.
39
==PAGE:41==
Note that moving horizontally right in Table 14 displays similar structures of the result as in
Table 12, and varies between 3.4 - 14.1%. The observant reader can note that the diagonal entries
diminishes for higher mix-pairs, which might seem counter-intuitive. The reason for this is due
to the fact that the average marginal travel time decrease between each zone pair is diminishing
in a similar manner, this is seen in Table A3 in Appendix C. The interpretation of the results
is that if cycle superhighways will not have impact on the adaptation rate of e-bikes or speed
pedelecs, i.e. the same mix is applied for on both networks, a lower mix on both the base network
and scenario network will yield higher marginal substitution to bikes, compared to a higher mix.
A table displaying the decrease in market shares for cars in Scenario 3 for all mixes is found in
Appendix C in Table A6. The ﬁgures from that table indicates a decrease between 0.8 - 3.2% in
Scenario 3.
Table 13: The market share for bikes (all types of bikes), bT SM
Bike, on base and
scenario networks for all mixes. [%]
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Base
22.2
22.3
22.8
22.8
23.2
23.7
23.5
24.0
24.5
Scenario 1
22.3
22.5
22.9
22.9
23.3
23.8
23.6
24.1
24.6
Scenario 2
22.7
22.8
23.3
23.3
23.7
24.2
24.0
24.5
25.0
Scenario 3
22.9
23.1
23.5
23.5
24.0
24.5
24.3
24.8
25.3
Table 14: The percentage increase in market share for bikes between base
network and Scenario 3 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
3.39
4.10
6.09
6.09
8.13
10.46
9.51
11.64
14.07
Mix2
3.37
5.35
5.34
7.37
9.68
8.74
10.85
13.27
Mix3
3.34
3.33
5.32
7.59
6.66
8.74
11.11
Mix4
3.33
5.32
7.59
6.66
8.73
11.10
Mix5
3.29
5.52
4.61
6.65
8.97
Mix6
3.26
2.36
4.36
6.63
Mix7
3.25
5.26
7.55
Mix8
3.22
5.47
Mix9
3.18
5.2.2
Distance
The average distance travelled by bike for the diﬀerent scenarios and mixes, d
AD
SM
Bike, are seen
in Table 15. A comparison between ﬁgures for base and Scenario 3, calculated as in Equation
23, is found in Table 16. The tables indicate an average distance for a bike trip between 8.23
- 8.84 kilometres for Scenario 3, which would mean an marginal increase between 2.9 - 10.6%.
Refer to the case study for a more elaborated discussion regarding the decrease in car-kilometres.
Corresponding tables for the increase in average trip length by bike can be found in Appendix C
in Tables A4 - A5.
Table 15: The average trip length by bike,d
AD
SM
Bike, on base and scenario networks
for all mixes. [km]
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Base (0)
8.00
8.04
8.15
8.14
8.26
8.39
8.33
8.45
8.59
Scenario 1
8.02
8.06
8.17
8.17
8.28
8.42
8.36
8.48
8.62
Scenario 2
8.15
8.19
8.30
8.30
8.41
8.55
8.49
8.61
8.75
Scenario 3
8.23
8.27
8.39
8.39
8.50
8.64
8.58
8.70
8.84
40
==PAGE:42==
Table 16: The percentage increase in average trip length by bike between base
and Scenario 3 network over varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
2.97
3.47
4.90
4.87
6.34
8.02
7.28
8.82
10.58
Mix2
2.97
4.39
4.35
5.82
7.49
6.76
8.29
10.04
Mix3
2.96
2.92
4.37
6.02
5.29
6.80
8.53
Mix4
2.96
4.41
6.06
5.33
6.84
8.57
Mix5
2.95
4.58
3.86
5.35
7.06
Mix6
2.94
2.23
3.70
5.38
Mix7
2.95
4.43
6.12
Mix8
2.94
4.61
Mix9
2.92
5.2.3
Consumer surplus
The consumer surplus for Scenario 3, CS3MSMb, over varying mixes in both the base and the
scenario is presented in Table 17. The ﬁgures vary between 320 - 459 m. DKK per year. As seen
and discussed for Table 14, the diagonal entries decrease also for the consumer surplus, indicating
that given the same mix on base and scenario network, a lower mix would be preferable in terms
of consumer surplus.
It is important to remember that the ﬁgures in the table are for Scenario 3, which is to be
implemented around the year of 2045, and a price level of 2019.
This brings the fact that in
order to use the ﬁgures in a cost-beneﬁt analysis, they need to be discounted back to a base year.
Corresponding tables for Scenario 1 & 2 can be found in Appendix C in Tables A12 - A13.
Table 17: Consumer surplus for Scenario 3, CS3MSMb, over varying mixes. [m.
DKK/year]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
370
375
388
388
403
423
413
433
459
Mix2
367
379
379
393
412
403
421
445
Mix3
357
357
368
384
376
391
411
Mix4
356
368
384
376
391
410
Mix5
347
360
353
366
381
Mix6
337
331
342
354
Mix7
339
350
364
Mix8
330
342
Mix9
320
41
==PAGE:43==
6
Case Study
To enable a more in-depth analysis, two speciﬁc mixes have been compared, Mix2 and Mix5. Mix2
have been implemented on the base network, while Mix5 have been implemented on the three
scenario networks, see Table 18. As the ﬁgures in the table display, this case represent a situation
where an increase for e-bikes, not for speed pedelecs, would appear to a certain degree without
any new cycle superhighway, compared to the assumed current situation in Mix1, and would be
further spurred by the extension of the network. The ﬁgures display a relatively large increase, a
factor 2.5 for e-bikes and factor 10 for speed pedelecs, which probably is an exaggeration of any
possible existing eﬀect. The case has nevertheless been chosen to statute an example. Furthermore,
the adaptation would most probably appear in a more continuous matter than what is displayed
here. The presentation of the results follow a similar structure as in Section 5.2 and have been
complemented with visualizations of consumer surplus on a zone-level and estimated bicycle ﬂows.
Table 18: Mixes applied on the networks in case study
Base
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Mix
Mix2
Mix5
Mix5
Mix5
Market shares
Reg. bike [%]
89.5
70
70
70
E-bike [%]
10
25
25
25
S pedelec[%]
0.5
5
5
5
6.1
Forecasting
The mode shift between the base and three scenarios for all modes in the case study can be seen
in Table 19. The market share columns, bT SM
m
, displays the estimated market share in the base
and the scenarios. The notations follow the previous deﬁnitions, refer to the nomenclature for
guidance. Note that the marginal changes, ∆[%], all have been compared to the base and should
not be understood as sequential. Comparing the marginal changes between the scenarios, it is
evident that the positive beneﬁts from inferring a higher mix and an extension of the network in
Scenario 1 have a larger marginal eﬀect, 4.4%, whereafter only extending the network yields an
additional 6.1−4.4 = 1.7%. This should, however, be seen in the light of the unrealistic assumption
of a sudden rather than continuous increase of e-bikes and speed pedelecs.
The substitution patterns reveal that the bicycle trips in relative sense mostly replaces trips
done by public transport, the smallest relative decrease is found for cars.
The pattern is, as
expected, similar to what could be seen for the model elasticities in Table 10.
Table 19: Market shares, bT SM
m
, for base and scenario networks in case study.
Base
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
bT 02
m [%]
bT 15
m [%]
∆[%]
bT 25
m [%]
∆[%]
bT 35
m [%]
∆[%]
Walk
11.1
10.9
-1.5
10.9
-2.0
10.9
-2.3
Bike
22.3
23.3
4.4
23.7
6.1
24.0
7.4
Car driver
42.1
41.7
-1.0
41.5
-1.4
41.4
-1.7
Car passenger
11.9
11.8
-1.2
11.7
-1.7
11.7
-2.0
Public transport
12.5
12.3
-2.1
12.2
-3.0
12.1
-3.6
Regarding the change in distance travelled for all modes, the results are displayed in Table 20.
Note that the ﬁgures only compare the base network and Scenario 3 network. For bicycles, the av-
erage distance in Scenario 3, d
AD
35
m, is increased by 0.5 kilometres, corresponding to approximately
6%, compared to the base. The tables indicate interesting results in terms of that the average trip
length is increasing for all modes except walking. This is due to the marginally larger decrease in
mode shift, -1.7%, than in total distance, -1.3%, seen in the two columns to the farthest right in
42
==PAGE:44==
Table 19 and Table 20. The total real diﬀerence, given by the ∆- column in Table 19, is decreasing
for all modes except bike.
Table 20: Average, d
AD
SM
m , and total distance, bDSM
m , for all modes on base and
Scenario 3 network in case study. [km]
Base
Scenario 3
d
AD
02
m
bD02
m
d
AD
35
m
∆[%]
bD35
m
∆[km]
∆[%]
Walk
3.7
22,131
3.7
-0.3
21,556
-575
-2.6
Bike
8.0
95,518
8.5
5.8
108,525
13,007
13.6
Car driver
30.7
687,230
30.8
0.4
678,130
-9,100
-1.3
Car passenger
48.4
306,354
48.6
0.5
301,539
-4,815
-1.6
Public transport
18.9
125,871
18.9
0.3
121,718
-4,153
-3.3
From a perspective of reducing congestion and emissions from car traﬃc, the reduction of car-
kilometres is of interest. Since the ﬁgure in Table 20, −9, 100 kilometers, is given from the model,
which is estimated on data from 37 600 individuals, it needs to be scaled to a population level.
According to the Capital Region of Denmark, the total number of inhabitants in the region is
approximately 1,8 millions (Region Hovedstaden n.d.). The number of people between the age of
10 - 84 can therefore coarsely be estimated to 1,5 million. The scaling is seen in Equation 24, note
that PopObs are the number of individuals in the observational data for this project and that ndays
is 250, as before. Furthermore, it is only the reduction for car driver kilometers which have been
included. The total reduction of car-kilometres per year is approximately 90.1 million for the case
study. Corresponding numbers for all scenarios over varying mixes are found in Table A9 - A15 in
Appendix C.
∆D35
Car = ∆bD35
Car · PopT ot
PopObs
· ndays = 9, 100 · 1.5 × 106
37, 600
= 90.1 × 106
(24)
The total number of bicycle trips, T SM
Bike and consumer surplus, CSSMSMb for the case study
are found in Table 21. The number of trips are displayed in thousands. The marginal increase
of trips show similar pattern as in Table 19, where there is a relatively large change already in
Scenario 1. The consumer surplus does, however, increase with a similar amount, approx. 170 m.
DKK, between Scenario 1 - Scenario 2 and Scenario 2 - Scenario 3. Considering the number of
kilometres constructed for each scenario, where Scenario 1 and Scenario 3 includes construction of
75 kilometres each and Scenario 2 436 kilometres, the fact that the diﬀerence is equal is surprising.
A further analysis regarding this is presented in 6.2.
Table 21: Number of trips, T SM
Bike, and consumer surplus, CSSMSMb, for base and
scenarios in case study.
Base
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
T 02
Bike
T 15
Bike
∆[%]
T 25
Bike
∆[%]
T 35
Bike
∆[%]
No. of trips [103]
1,053
1,105
4.9
1,128
7.1
1,151
9.3
CS152
CS252
CS352
Consumer surplus [m. DKK]
-
55
-
221
-
393
-
6.2
Visualizations
The consumer surplus and estimated link ﬂows in base and Scenario 3 for the case study are shown
in Figure 7 & 8, a comparison of the consumer surplus between Scenario 2 and Scenario 3 is shown
in Figure 9. The ﬁgures display a smaller extent then the whole area, ﬁgures for the the whole
area and full-page ﬁgures of the two shown here can be found after the appendices. Note that the
43
==PAGE:45==
consumer surplus is the same for both ﬁgures. Since the consumer surplus is calculated pair-wise,
the dis-aggregated values for consumer surplus for a zone are given by two values, to and from,
and therefore needs to be summed over one of them. In this case, the ﬁgures display the consumer
surplus travelling from a zone. Using the consumer surplus to a zone could render a somewhat
diﬀerent pattern, but since the travel time between each zone pair can be assumed to be the same,
no matter which zone constituting the origin or destination, such a visualization would merely
display diﬀerences in travel patterns. Figure 7 displays the estimated link ﬂows in the used base in
the case study, base network and Mix2, while Figure 8 displays the estimated link ﬂows in Scenario
3 in the case study, Scenario 3 and Mix5. The ﬂows are rather uncertain due limitations of the
applied all-or-nothing fastest path model. Hence, the ﬁgures should rather be understood as a heat
map than estimations of actual ﬂows.
Three points have been added in the map to highlight interesting results. The ﬁrst point (1),
indicates the change of ﬂow from Roskilderuten which is currently under construction, Scenario 1,
to Vestbaneruten, belonging to Scenario 3. The reason for the change in ﬂow are the few crossing
of signalized intersections for Vestbaneruten. The increased ﬂow and reduced travel time between
Copenhagen and Roskilde due to this, attributes to a signiﬁcant amount of increased consumer
surplus between Scenario 2 and Scenario 3, seen in Figure 9. The second point (2) indicates the
ﬂow for Havneruten, Scenario 2, which is planned to go via a new connection over the harbour. The
implementation of the route reduces travel time to almost half for certain zone-pairs on diﬀerent
side of the water, and indicates an increase in the ﬂow of bicycles alongside all the eastern corridor
of the island of Amager.
The third point (3), indicates an area alongside the coast, the Municipality of Hørsholm, where
an increase in ﬂows can be seen both north, route Helsingørmotorvejen in Scenario 3, and south,
Øresundsruten in Scenario 2, of the area. As indicated in Figure 9, the diﬀerence in consumer
surplus between Scenario 2 and Scenario 3 is substantial for this area. This change should, how-
ever, not only be attributed to the two routes mentioned previously, Helsingørmotorvejen and
Øresundsruten, but can also to assumed to appear because of the two routes, Odrup Banesti and
Lyngby Banesti which are both in Scenario 3, forming the triangular shape further south towards
Copenhagen.
Due to the vast network and the fact that the scenarios consists of several diﬀerent routes,
especially Scenario 2, it is diﬃcult to directly relate the obtained beneﬁts to certain routes. The
few routes constituting Scenario 3 does, however, result in an substantial increase in the direct
beneﬁts. The direct reasons for that increase have been pointed out in the above text, but should,
nevertheless, be seen in the light of being part of a network, and therefore also dependent of
other routes. Since these routes are part of the last implementation of the network, there are
also uncertainties regarding the actual alignment of these routes, which might change or cases of
additional signalized intersection.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7: Link ﬂows on base network with
Mix2. Consumer surplus for Scenario 3
Figure 8: Link ﬂows on Scenario 3 network
with Mix5. Consumer surplus for Scenario 3
Figure 9: Diﬀerence in consumer surplus between Scenario 3 and Scenario 2
45
==PAGE:47==
6.3
Sensitivity Analysis
To consider some of the uncertainties regarding the methodology used in this report, two sensitivity
analyses have been performed. The analyses are presented below and the results are presented in
Tables 22 - 24.
The ﬁrst analysis relates to the assumption that cycle superhighways oﬀer the possibility of rid-
ing at higher speeds throughout the whole network. Firstly, the categorization into three diﬀerent
categories is rather coarse, and any errors existing in the OSM network have a large risk of being
undetected due to the large number of links, approximately 500 000. Secondly, the assumption
that cycle superhighways can oﬀer higher speeds than other dedicated bicycle infrastructure is
based on data from relatively few locations. This also brings the fact that when a link, which is
not a part of a cycle superhighway in the base network, is ”upgraded” to a cycle superhighway
in a later scenario, the speed is assumed to increase. This might very well be the result in some
cases, but applied throughout the whole network, it will cause some unrealistic speed changes, i.e.
the bridge Cykelslangen is today not a part of a cycle superhighway route but will be in a later
network.
A more conservative estimation of the eﬀects have therefore been calculated, assuming no speed
diﬀerence between dedicated bicycle infrastructure and cycle superhighways. Hence, the speeds
applied in the route assignment have been modiﬁed, the value in the Cycle Superhighway-column
have been set to equal the value in the Dedicated-column, all else equal.
The second analysis relates to the use of sub-samples when estimating the choice model, and the
fact that the estimates varied to some extent between the models. To account for these variations,
the model has been applied also for the 90% conﬁdence interval values presented in Table 9.
The ﬁgures in Table 22 indicates some range for the estimated mode change, where the variance
in the model estimation indicates a range between 6.9 - 7.7%-points, which corresponds to 5-10%.
The low-speed network predicts a market share increase of 5.4%, being 25-30% lower than the used
mean-estimates model. Note that the columns representing the marginal change ∆[%] displays the
marginal increase between the models applied in Scenario 3 and their respective base, it is not a
comparison between the models. Similar variation can be seen in the numbers for distance and
number of trips, Table 23 & 24. The variation is, however, signiﬁcantly larger for the consumer
surplus, where a low-speed network renders an amount of only 40% of the mean model. The large
diﬀerence can be explained by looking in in the calculation for the consumer surplus, Equation
21 in Section 4.3. From there it can be seen that the value in both of the parenthesis decreases,
due to fewer people and less time diﬀerence, explaining the relatively large decrease in consumer
surplus. Tables with results from the low-speed network can be found in Appendix D.
The variation in consumer surplus from the model are within the same range as for mode shift,
i.e. 5 - 10%. A noteworthy results is that the model using the lower values, CI low, indicating higher
dis-utility for all generalized time parameters, indicates higher marginal change for all results. This
stems from the fact that a lower value for the parameters, meaning higher absolute value, results
in higher elasticity, and hence, also higher consumer surplus.
Table 22: Estimated market shares, bTm35, for all modes in Scenario 3 for the four diﬀerent models.
Marginals are compared with base in case study, not between models.
Mean
Low-speed
CI low
CI high
bTm35 [%]
∆[%]
bTm35 [%]
∆[%]
bTm35 [%]
∆[%]
bTm35 [%]
∆[%]
Walk
10.9
-2.3
11.0
-1.7
8.4
-1.9
13.3
-2.6
Bike
24.0
7.4
23.3
5.4
18.0
7.7
30.7
6.9
Car driver
41.4
-1.7
41.7
-1.2
49.5
-1.1
33.2
-2.4
Car passenger
11.7
-2.0
11.8
-1.5
11.2
-1.6
11.8
-2.6
Public transport
12.1
-3.6
12.3
-2.6
12.9
-2.9
11.1
-4.4
46
==PAGE:48==
Table 23: Average distance, d
AD
35
m, and total distance, bD35
m , for model using mean
estimates and for low-speed model. [km]
Mean
Low-speed
d
AD
35
m
∆[%]
bD35
m
∆[%]
d
AD
35
m
∆[%]
bD35
m
∆[%]
Walk
3.7
-0.3
-575
-2.6
3.7
-0.2
-422
-1.9
Bike
8.5
5.8
13,007
13.6
8.3
4.0
8,989
9.6
Car driver
30.8
0.4
-9,100
-1.3
30.7
0.3
-6,562
-1.0
Car passenger
48.6
0.5
-4,815
-1.6
48.5
0.3
-3,484
-1.1
Public transport
18.9
0.3
-4,153
-3.3
18.9
0.2
-2,990
-2.4
Table 24: Number of trips, T 35
Bike, and consumer surplus, CS352, for the four diﬀerent models.
Mean
Low-speed
CI low
CI high
T 35
Bike
∆[%]
T 35
Bike
∆[%]
T 35
Bike
∆[%]
T 35
Bike
∆[%]
No. of trips [103]
1,151
9.3
1,122
6.5
1,171
11.1
1,131
7.5
CS352
CS352
CS352
CS352
Consumer surplus [m. DKK]
392
-
159
-
409
-
378
-
47
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
The results presented in the case study indicates an increasing consumer surplus for the three
sequential scenarios. From 55 m. DKK per year for Scenario 1, to 221 m. DKK per year for
Scenario 2 to a ﬁnal 393 m. DKK per year for Scenario 3, which is planned to be constructed around
year 2045. The market share for bikes in Scenario 3 is estimated to increase by 7.4%, resulting
in a total of 100 000 new bike trips per year, which was previously made by other modes. The
substitution pattern indicates that the new bicycle trips mostly will replace trips which previously
would have been done by public transport or walking, for car the market share decreases with
1.7%. The estimated reduction of car driver-kilometers are 1.3%. Scaled to a population level, this
would result in a total reduction of 90 million car kilometres per year. Which, in addition to the
beneﬁts from travel time savings, also would yield indirect beneﬁts such as reduced CO2-emission,
air and noise pollution and possibly also congestion relief and health beneﬁts.
The sensitivity analysis shows that the estimated range for the beneﬁts due to the variation in
the model is relatively small, 5 - 10 %. The large uncertainty is regarding the possibility of riding
faster on cycle superhighways than on other dedicated bicycle infrastructure. The conservative
ﬁgures show a substantial decrease, 60%, in consumer surplus if no speed diﬀerence between cycle
superhighways and dedicate bicycle infrastructure can be obtained. In this report the two extreme
cases have been implemented; that all cycle superhighways enable higher speed or that non enable
higher speed. The reality is probably somewhere in between, a realistic estimation of a consumer
surplus would therefore be around the mean from the two applications, i.e. multiplying the ﬁgure
obtained from the mean-estimates model by 0.7, which would result in approx. 275 m. DKK
per year in Scenario 3. An additional dimension to this is the possible case that diﬀerent bike
types might experience diﬀerent eﬀects, e.g. a speed pedelec might not be able to utilize the full
potential of a cycle superhighway in urban areas compared to rural due to the surrounding traﬃc.
Whereas a regular bike might be more dependent on the width and surface, than on the urban/rural
dimension. Nevertheless, the results from the low-speed network can be seen as an indication of
the importance of trying to enable possibilities of lower travelling times on cycle superhighways,
either due to good conditions and design, direct routes or minimizing the time spent at crossings,
by e.g. minimizing the number of crossings or optimization of green time.
Looking at the results presented in Section 5.2, it is evident that the results varies largely
depending on the assumption regarding the mix of bikes, and if the cycle superhighways will have
an eﬀect on the mix. If Mix5 would have been applied also on the base network in the case analysis,
the estimated beneﬁts would be 356 m. DKK per year in Scenario 3 (Table 17 in Section 5.2).
Comparing to the now estimated 392 m. DKK per year, the results can be viewed as relatively
robust with regards to the situation where cycle superhighways would have no eﬀect on the use
of e-bikes or speed pedelecs. Table 17 does, however, entail that the robustness decreases the
higher the assumed mix. The methodology of comparing low mixes on the base network with
high mixes on the scenario networks does not infer a purely causal eﬀect from extension of the
cycle superhighway network. It should rather be understood as a tool to compare hypothetical
future use of bicycle types. Improvement of the bicycle infrastructure could most deﬁnitely have
a positive impact on the adaptation of diﬀerent types of e-bikes, but as a single measure it might
have a limited impact. In the event of cycle superhighways being part of a larger scheme towards
increased use of bicycles on longer trips, other elements of such a scheme could be non-transport
related infrastructure, e.g. safe bicycle parking, e-bike trials, the routes might be a necessary but
not suﬃcient condition to issue a signiﬁcant increase of e-bikes and speed pedelecs. A similar
condition regarding bike infrastructure is discussed and observed in (Song et al. 2017).
Furthermore, ﬁgures in Section 5.2 should be seen and interpreted with the uncertainties re-
vealed in the sensitivity analysis. The low-speed model forecasts approximately 30% lower marginal
change for all travel predictions, e.g.
number of bicycle trips, distances, mode shift, and 60%
lower consumer surplus.
A rough estimate, using a mean between the mean-estimates model
and the low-speed model, would result in that travel predictions from the mean-estimates model
needs to be decreased by a factor, (1 + (1 −0.3))/2 = 0.85, and consumer surplus by a factor,
48
==PAGE:50==
(1 + (1 −0.6))/2 = 0.7. A presentation of what ﬁgures such a calculation would render in Scenario
3 are presented in Table 25.
Table 25: Summary over ﬁgures obtained in Scenario 3 for mean-estimate model,
travel predictions and consumer surplus multiplied with 0.85, respectively 0.7
Number of bike trips
Car-driver kilometers
Consumer Surplus
T 35
Bike [106]
∆T 35
Bike [%]
∆D35
Car [km×106]
CS35MB [m. DKK/year]
0.93 - 1.24
3.8 - 15.4
-35 – -150
230 - 320
Comparison to Previous Findings
A comparison of the results from previous cycle superhighway studies in (Rayaprolu et al. 2018;
Agarwal et al. 2019) shows varying diﬀerences. In the most extreme case, the two studies assume a
possibility of riding twice as fast on cycle superhighway, resulting in a predicted increase of market
share for bicycles of 25% in (Rayaprolu et al. 2018), respectively 44% in (Agarwal et al. 2019).
The results found in the case study and for the most extreme diﬀerence in mixes from Section
5.2, are both considerably lower. For the case with no speed increase on cycle superhighways, the
comparison of the results is, however, the opposite. The conservative calculation using a low-speed
network in this report indicates an increase of market share bicycles of around 5%, while both
(Agarwal et al. 2019; Rayaprolu et al. 2018) reports neglectable increase.
The results found in the case study are similar to what is presented in (Van Goeverden, T. S.
Nielsen, et al. 2015), where the observed growth in cycling volume due to a city-wide improvement
where less then 10%. Compared to ﬁndings in (Van Goeverden, T. S. Nielsen, et al. 2015), the
predicted mode shift from car to bicycle is comparable, 2-3%. For the increase in number of bicycle
trips, the estimates for Scenario 1 is similar to what (Skov-Petersen et al. 2017) ﬁnds, 4-6%, while
the subsequent scenarios predict higher increase, being a result of extending the network.
Forecasts are to their nature uncertain and the ones performed in this report are no exemp-
tion. In the setting of the Capital Region of Denmark, a few considerations should be done for
the predictions. As stated in (Van Goeverden, T. S. Nielsen, et al. 2015), the awaited increase
in market share due to city-wide improvements in bicycle infrastructure is dependent on the pre-
improvement market share. The higher the market share are before, the smaller marginal increase
can be expected. Hence, the existence of an already existing biking culture could perhaps aﬀect
the marginal eﬀects negatively. Connecting to this, is the question regarding lifestyle-choices as
examined in (Prato, Halld´orsd´ottir, and Anker Nielsen 2017), and the fact that the population
might not be homogeneous in their preference for transport modes. Diﬀerence in preference re-
garding to bike could be due to comfort, travel time or safety. It might be that the the possibility
of riding faster and/or safer, and with more comfort due to e-bikes and better infrastructure (read
cycle superhighways), could enable a mode shift among previously bicycle-averse individuals. To
which extent this is the case needs further research before any indications of the above stated can
be supported. The previously presented data from the Danish Road Directorate in (Vejdiktoratet
2019), does indicate that e-bikes replace trips previously done by car to some extent.
To enable a complete assessment of the cycle superhighways further analysis is required. As
previously presented this has been done in (Incentive 2018). Due to time limitations, a direct
comparison of the estimated beneﬁts have not been done. On a network level, the assumed average
increase of bicycle trips of 9% in (Incentive 2018) are within range of the results obtained in the
case study here. Important to remember is, however, that the case study assumes a relatively
large diﬀerence in mixes between the scenarios and the base. Looking in Table 12, it can be seen
that a 9% increase is not predicted for any of the diagonal entries, meaning that such an increase
is not predicted to occur without assuming a positive eﬀect from the cycle superhighways on the
adaptation of e-bikes and speed pedelecs.
It should be mentioned an additional time that this report has not included any time dimension.
This means that no future eﬀects on transport demand has been considered, and that the estimated
beneﬁts needs to be discounted back to a base year before any comparisons with construction and
49
==PAGE:51==
maintenance cost can be done. Furthermore, the beneﬁts only include direct beneﬁts from reduced
travel time with an assumed average value-of-time of 90 DKK/hour for 250 days/year. Any indirect
beneﬁts stemming from any emission-reductions, e.g. CO2, air or noise, or reduction of congestion
should hence be added according to the assumptions of the cost-beneﬁt analysis, refer to note
regarding value-of-time in bicycle appraisals Section 4.3 or (B¨orjesson et al. 2011). For any future
use of the ﬁgures presented in this study, it is recommended to select results from a subset of the
mixes presented here, preferably discarding the most extreme cases with e-bikes having a market
share as high as 50%. That will simplify an assessment and enable a more focused analysis.
Uncertainties and Improvement of Methodology
There are several uncertainties regarding the methodology used in this report. Two of which have
already been analyzed in the sensitivity analysis and discussed previously. With regards to cyclists’
speed, it can, however, be added that more data regarding travelling for e-bikes and speed pedelcs
in Denmark is needed.
An improvement of the used choice model would be obtained by including the choice of bike type
explicitly, assuming there is suﬃcient data to support such a model. This would ﬁrst and foremost
discard the need of aggregating the level-of-service matrix for bike to a zone level in the estimation
phase, and, hence, the need of assumed market shares for diﬀerent types of bike. The implications
with regards to the estimation, e.g. using diﬀerent cost-parameters for diﬀerent types of bikes,
needs to be examined further. The implications for the model application would, however, be
that the previously discussed additional weights for making the choice of bike distance-dependent,
redundant.
The all-or-nothing fastest path assignment provides a suﬃcient accurate calculation of the
travel times but has some limitations.
No comfort measures, e.g.
hilliness, surface quality or
safety, directly enters the choice of routes. They indirectly enter since the biking infrastructure
often times supplying this, have been given higher speed. The all-or-nothing part of the assignment
have drawbacks in terms of not including any capacity constraints, an assumption which, however,
can be justiﬁed on a network level. One drawback from the fastest path part in the assignment is the
lack of dis-utility for turns, resulting in that signalized intersections are often avoided by deviating
from a route, making the link ﬂows relatively uncertain. Furthermore, there are excluded eﬀects
from previously pointed out simpliﬁcations in the inclusion of signalized intersections, regarding
left-turns and future intersections.
7.1
Conclusion
This report has exempliﬁed how transport modelling methodologies can be applied to assess the
direct beneﬁts from region-wide expansion of a network of cycle superhighways. The methodology
incorporates an estimation of a joint destination and mode choice model. The model was estimated
on micro data from the Danish National Transport Survey (TU), level-of-service values for bicycles
have been calculated by a all-or-nothing fastest path assignment on a modiﬁed Open Street Map
network.
The results obtained in this study shows relatively large variations. The variation is heavily
dependent on the adaptation of e-bikes and speed pedelecs, and if the construction of cycle super-
highways can have a positive impact on this adaptation, as well as if cycle superhighways can oﬀer
possibilities of riding faster than on other types of dedicated bicycle infrastructure. The most real-
istic estimation of any travel patterns and consumer surplus, would be to consider a mean between
what is found in the main analysis, mean-estimates model, and the conservative calculations using
a low-speed network. Such a consideration would yield a consumer surplus of 230 - 320 m. DKK
per year in 2045 in the price level of 2019, and an increase in number of bicycle trips with 4 - 15%
compared to the current level. The substitution patterns from the choice model indicates that the
new bicycle trips would mostly replace trips previously made by walking or public transport, the
decrease in market for cars is estimated to 1-3%. It is, however, estimated that a total reduction
50
==PAGE:52==
in car-driver kilometers between 35 - 150 million per year could be obtained. The variation in the
estimates depends on the assumption regarding future use of e-bikes and speed pedelcs. Hence, in
the case of a future assessments using any ﬁgures presented in this study, a subset of the result
should be selected, reducing the variation.
Conclusions regarding beneﬁts for single routes are uncertain to determine due to the imple-
mentation of multiple routes simultaneously. Hence, further analysis is needed to separate the
eﬀects for single routes. The relatively large diﬀerence in consumer surplus between the main
analysis and the low-speed network can be seen as an indication of the importance of trying to
enable possibilities of lower travelling times on cycle superhighways. This could be accomplished
either by good conditions and design, direct routes or minimizing the time spent at crossings, by
e.g. minimizing the number of crossings or optimization of green time.
An important improvement of the methodology would be to include more data and information
regarding the use of e-bikes and speed pedelecs, and thus, enabling to explicitly model the choice
of bike type. The results found here needs to be considered with a time perspective in order to
draw any further conclusions of a monetary assessment of the cycle superhighways.
51
==PAGE:53==
References
Abdul Aziz, HM et al. (2018). “A high resolution agent-based model to support walk-bicycle
infrastructure investment decisions: A case study with New York City”. In: Transportation
Research Part C 86, pp. 280–299. doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2017.11.008. url: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.11.008.
Agarwal, Amit, Dominik Ziemke, and Kai Nagel (July 2019). “Bicycle superhighway: An environ-
mentally sustainable policy for urban transport”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice. issn: 09658564. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2019.06.015. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S096585641731162X.
Amir, Seyed et al. (2016). “Exploring the link between the neighborhood typologies, bicycle infras-
tructure and commuting cycling over time and the potential impact on commuter GHG emis-
sions”. In: Transportation Research Part D 47, pp. 89–103. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2016.05.008.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2016.05.008.
Bernardi, Silvia and Federico Rupi (2015). “An analysis of bicycle travel speed and disturbances
on oﬀ-street and on-street facilities”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 5, pp. 82–94. issn:
23521465. doi: 10.1016/j.trpro.2015.01.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
trpro.2015.01.004.
Bonham, Jennifer and Marilyn Johnson (2015). Cycling Futures. isbn: 9781925261165.
B¨orjesson, Maria and Jonas Eliasson (2011). The value of time and external beneﬁts in bicycle
appraisal. Tech. rep. url: www.cts.kth.se.
Buehler, Ralph and Jennifer Dill (2016). “Bikeway Networks: A Review of Eﬀects on Cycling”. In:
Transport Reviews 36.1, pp. 9–27. issn: 14645327. doi: 10.1080/01441647.2015.1069908.
Buekers, Jurgen et al. (2015). “Health impact model for modal shift from car use to cycling or
walking in Flanders: application to two bicycle highways”. In: Journal of Transport and Health.
doi: 10.1016/j.jth.2015.08.003. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2015.08.003.
Cairns, S. et al. (Sept. 2017). “Electrically-assisted bikes: Potential impacts on travel behaviour”.
In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 103, pp. 327–342. issn: 09658564. doi:
10.1016/j.tra.2017.03.007.
Castro, Alberto et al. (2019). “Physical activity of electric bicycle users compared to conventional
bicycle users and non-cyclists: Insights based on health and transport data from an online
survey in seven European cities”. In: Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 1,
p. 100017. issn: 25901982. doi: 10.1016/j.trip.2019.100017.
City of London (2016). Cycling Master Plan - Final Executive Summary—. Tech. rep.
CIVITAS (n.d.). Smart choices for cities Cycling in the City. Tech. rep.
Danish Road Safety Agency (2019). Forsøgsordning for speed pedelecs. url: https://www.fstyr.
dk/pedelec.
Danmarks Statistik (2019). Elcykler vinder frem p˚a det danske cykelmarked - Danmarks Statistik.
url: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/bagtal/2019/2019-05-10-elcykler-vinder-
frem-paa-det-danske-cykelmarked.
— (n.d.). Befolkning og valg - Danmarks Statistik. url: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/
emner/befolkning-og-valg.
Doorley, Ronan, Vikram Pakrashi, and Bidisha Ghosh (2017). “Health impacts of cycling in Dublin
on individual cyclists and on the local population”. In: Journal of Transport & Health 6, pp. 420–
432. doi: 10.1016/j.jth.2017.03.014. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.
03.014.
DTU Transport (n.d.[a]). Landstraﬁkmodellen. url: http://www.landstrafikmodellen.dk/.
— (n.d.[b]). Transportøkonomiske Enhedspriser - Center for Transport Analytics. url: https:
//www.cta.man.dtu.dk/modelbibliotek/teresa/transportoekonomiske-enhedspriser.
— (n.d.[c]). Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU) - Center for Transport Analytics. url: https :
//www.cta.man.dtu.dk/transportvaneundersoegelsen.
Ehrgott, Matthias et al. (2012). “A bi-objective cyclist route choice model”. In: Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice 46.4, pp. 652–663. issn: 09658564. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.
2011.11.015. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2011.11.015.
52
==PAGE:54==
ELTIS (n.d.). New Policies needed to tackle Unsustainable Urban Sprawl (EU) — Eltis. url:
https://www.eltis.org/discover/news/new-policies-needed-tackle-unsustainable-
urban-sprawl-eu-0.
Eriksson, Jenny et al. (2019). “An analysis of cyclists’ speed at combined pedestrian and cycle
paths”. In: Traﬃc Injury Prevention 0.0, pp. 1–6. issn: 1538-9588. doi: 10.1080/15389588.
2019.1658083. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/15389588.2019.1658083.
European Commission (n.d.[a]). Developments and Forecasts on Continuing Urbanisation — Knowl-
edge for policy. url: https : / / ec . europa . eu / knowledge4policy / foresight / topic /
continuing-urbanisation/developments-and-forecasts-on-continuing-urbanisation_
en.
— (n.d.[b]). Urban mobility — Mobility and Transport. url: https://ec.europa.eu/transport/
themes/urban/urban_mobility_en.
European Environmental Agency (n.d.). Managing exposure to noise in Europe — European Envi-
ronment Agency. url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/human/noise/sub-sections/
noise-in-europe-updated-population-exposure#tab-related-briefings.
Fietssnelweg 35 (n.d.). Fietssnelweg35. url: http://www.fietssnelwegf35.nl/.
Fietssnelwegen (n.d.). Fietssnelwegen in English. url: https://fietssnelwegen.be/extra/
fietssnelwegen-in-english.
Fishman, Elliot and Christopher Cherry (2016). “E-bikes in the Mainstream: Reviewing a Decade
of Research”. In: Transport Reviews 36.1, pp. 72–91. issn: 14645327. doi: 10.1080/01441647.
2015.1069907.
Google (n.d.). Google Maps. url: https://www.google.dk/maps/@55.6670537,12.4976629,13z.
G¨ossling, Stefan (Dec. 2013). “Urban transport transitions: Copenhagen, city of cyclists”. In: Jour-
nal of Transport Geography 33, pp. 196–206. issn: 09666923. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.
10.013.
Heinen, Eva et al. (Sept. 2017). “Does exposure to new transport infrastructure result in modal
shifts? Patterns of change in commute mode choices in a four-year quasi-experimental cohort
study”. In: Journal of Transport & Health 6, pp. 396–410. issn: 22141405. doi: 10.1016/j.
jth.2017.07.009. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.07.009%20https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S221414051730155X.
Hood, Jeﬀrey, Elizabeth Sall, and Billy Charlton (2011). “A GPS-based bicycle route choice model
for San Francisco, California”. In: Transportation Letters 3.1, pp. 63–75. issn: 19427875. doi:
10.3328/TL.2011.03.01.63-75.
Houkes, Roeland (2019). The economic beneﬁts of cycling highways: Do they allow cyclists to ride
at higher speeds? Tech. rep.
Incentive (2018). Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af supercykelstierne. Tech. rep.
International Transport Forum (Dec. 2013). Cycling, Health and Safety. ITF Research Reports.
OECD, p. 245. isbn: 9789282105948. doi: 10.1787/9789282105955-en. url: https://www.
oecd-ilibrary.org/transport/cycling-health-and-safety_9789282105955-en.
Jensen, Thomas Christian and Linda Christensen (2008). Korte ture i bil - Kan bilister aendre
adfaerd til gang eller cykling. Tech. rep. url: www.transport.dtu.dk.
Jovicic, Goran and Christian Overgaard Hansen (2003). “A passenger travel demand model for
Copenhagen”. In: Transport Research Part A 27, pp. 333–349. url: www . elsevier . com /
locate/tra.
Københavns Kommune (2012). Kbh 2025 - Klimaplanen. Tech. rep.
Kowarik, Alexander and Matthias Templ (2016). “Imputation with the R package VIM”. In: Jour-
nal of Statistical Software 74.7. issn: 15487660. doi: 10.18637/jss.v074.i07.
Krizek, Kevin J., Gary Barnes, and Kristin Thompson (2009). “Analyzing the eﬀect of bicycle
facilities on commute mode share over time”. In: Journal of Urban Planning and Development
135.2, pp. 66–73. issn: 07339488. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9488(2009)135:2(66).
Li, Haojie et al. (2018). “Eﬀects of the London Cycle Superhighways on the usage of the London
Cycle Hire”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 111.March, pp. 304–315.
issn: 09658564. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2018.03.020. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.
2018.03.020.
Litman, Todd (2013). “Smart Congeston Relief”. In:
53
==PAGE:55==
Liu, George et al. (June 2019). “Practitioners’ perspective on user experience and design of cy-
cle highways”. In: Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 1, p. 100010. issn:
25901982. doi: 10.1016/j.trip.2019.100010.
Menghini, G et al. (2010). “Route choice of cyclists in Zurich”. In: Transportation Research Part
A 44, pp. 754–765. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2010.07.008. url: www.matsim.org.
MOE Tetraplan (n.d.). Traﬁkplanlægning - MOE Tetraplan. url: https://www.moe.dk/Ydelser/
trafikplanlaegning/.
Mueller, Natalie et al. (Apr. 2018). “Health impact assessment of cycling network expansions in
European cities”. In: Preventive Medicine 109, pp. 62–70. issn: 10960260. doi: 10.1016/j.
ypmed.2017.12.011.
Nielsen, Thomas Alexander Sick, Anton S. Olafsson, et al. (2013). “Environmental correlates of
cycling: Evaluating urban form and location eﬀects based on Danish micro-data”. In: Trans-
portation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 22, p. 40. issn: 13619209. doi: 10.
1016/j.trd.2013.02.017.
Nielsen, Thomas Alexander Sick and Hans Skov-Petersen (2018). “Bikeability – Urban structures
supporting cycling. Eﬀects of local, urban and regional scale urban form factors on cycling from
home and workplace locations in Denmark”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 69.March,
pp. 36–44. issn: 09666923. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2018.04.015. url: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2018.04.015.
Open Street Map (n.d.). OpenStreetMap. url: https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=7/56.
188/11.617.
Paulsen, Mads and Kai Nagel (2019). “Large-Scale Assignment of Congested Bicycle Traﬃc Using
Speed Heterogeneous Agents”. In: Procedia Computer Science 151, pp. 820–825. issn: 18770509.
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.112. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.
112.
Paulsen, Mads, Thomas Kjær Rasmussen, and Otto Anker Nielsen (2019). “Fast or forced to
follow: A speed heterogeneous approach to congested multi-lane bicycle traﬃc simulation”. In:
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 127, pp. 72–98. issn: 01912615. doi: 10.1016/
j.trb.2019.07.002. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2019.07.002.
Pinjari, Abdul Rawoof et al. (2011). “Modeling the choice continuum: an integrated model of resi-
dential location, auto ownership, bicycle ownership, and commute tour mode choice decisions”.
In: Transportation 38, pp. 933–958. doi: 10.1007/s11116-011-9360-y.
Plazier, Paul A., Gerd Weitkamp, and Agnes E. van den Berg (2017). ““Cycling was never so
easy!” An analysis of e-bike commuters’ motives, travel behaviour and experiences using GPS-
tracking and interviews”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 65.December 2016, pp. 25–34.
issn: 09666923. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2017.09.017. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jtrangeo.2017.09.017.
Prato, Carlo Giacomo, Katr´ın Halld´orsd´ottir, and Otto Anker Nielsen (2017). “Latent lifestyle and
mode choice decisions when travelling short distances”. In: Transportation 44, pp. 1343–1363.
doi: 10.1007/s11116-016-9703-9.
Prato, Carlo Giacomo, Katr´ın Halld´orsd´ottir, and Otto Anker Nielsen (2018). “Evaluation of land-
use and transport network eﬀects on cyclists’ route choices in the Copenhagen Region in value-
of-distance space”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 12.10, pp. 770–781.
issn: 15568334. doi: 10.1080/15568318.2018.1437236. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
15568318.2018.1437236.
Rayaprolu, Hema S, Carlos Llorca, and Rolf Moeckel (Sept. 2018). “Impact of bicycle highways on
commuter mode choice: A scenario analysis”. In: Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics
and City Science, pp. 1–16. issn: 2399-8083. doi: 10.1177/2399808318797334. url: http:
//journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2399808318797334.
Region Hovedstaden (2016). “Region Hovedstadens cykelregnskab 2016”. In:
— (2019). Traﬁk-og mobilitetsplan for hovedstadsregionen. Tech. rep.
— (n.d.). Befolkning. url: https : / / www . regionh . dk / om - region - hovedstaden / fakta /
befolkning/Sider/Befolkning.aspx.
Rich, Jeppe and Christian Overgaard Hansen (2016). “The Danish national passenger model –
Model speciﬁcation and results”. In: European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research
16.4, pp. 573–599. issn: 15677141. doi: 10.18757/ejtir.2016.16.4.3159.
54
==PAGE:56==
Rich, Jeppe and Stefan E Mabit (2019). Transport Models - From Theory to Practise. 9.0. Depart-
ment of Management Engineering: Technical University of Denmark.
Rietveld, Piet and Vanessa Daniel (n.d.). “Determinants of bicycle use: do municipal policies mat-
ter?” In: (). doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2004.05.003. url: www.elsevier.com/locate/tra.
Rossi, Riccardo et al. (2017). “Fitting time headway and speed distributions for bicycles on separate
bicycle lanes”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 27, pp. 19–26. issn: 23521465. doi: 10.
1016/j.trpro.2017.12.051. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2017.12.051.
Rotthier, Bram et al. (2017). “Typical cruising speed of speed pedelecs and the link with motor
power as a result of a Belgian naturalistic cycling study”. In: September, pp. 21–23.
Schleinitz, K. et al. (2017). “The German Naturalistic Cycling Study – Comparing cycling speed of
riders of diﬀerent e-bikes and conventional bicycles”. In: Safety Science 92, pp. 290–297. issn:
18791042. doi: 10.1016/j.ssci.2015.07.027. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.
2015.07.027.
Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier (2019a). Supercykelsti cykelregnskab. Tech. rep.
— (2019b). Tag cyklen p˚a arbejde - Sundt, nemt og sikkert. Tech. rep.
— (n.d.). Cycle superhighways - Supercykelstier. url: https://supercykelstier.dk/english/.
Skov-Petersen, Hans et al. (Oct. 2017). “Eﬀects of upgrading to cycle highways - An analysis of
demand induction, use patterns and satisfaction before and after”. In: Journal of Transport
Geography 64, pp. 203–210. issn: 09666923. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2017.09.011.
Song, Yena, John Preston, and David Ogilvie (2017). “New walking and cycling infrastructure and
modal shift in the UK: A quasi-experimental panel study”. In: Transport Research Part A 95,
pp. 320–333. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2016.11.017. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.
2016.11.017.
Supercykelstier, Sekretariatet for (n.d.). Hvad er en supercykelsti? - Supercykelstier. url: https:
//supercykelstier.dk/hvad-er-en-supercykelsti/.
Technical University of Denmark (2018). Faktaark om cykeltraﬁk i Danmark 2017 - Center for
Transport Analytics. url: https://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/transportvaneundersoegelsen/
tu-udgivelser/faktaark-om-cykeltrafik-i-danmark-2014.
Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen (2011). Fra god til verdens bedste. Tech. rep.
Thorsten Koska, Authors et al. (2016). The Role of Walking and Cycling in Reducing Congestion:
A Portfolio of Measures. Tech. rep. url: http://www.h2020-flow.eu..
Train, Kenneth E. (2009). Discrete choice methods with simulation. Vol. 9780521816. Cambridge
University Press, pp. 1–334. isbn: 9780511753930. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511753930.
Transportation Alternatives (2017). BikeNYC 2020. Tech. rep.
United Nations (2016). Mobilizing Sustainable Transport for Development. Tech. rep. url: https:
//sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=400&nr=2375&menu=
1515.
Van Goeverden, Kees and Tom Godefrooij (2011). The Dutch Reference Study. Tech. rep.
Van Goeverden, Kees, Thomas Sick Nielsen, et al. (2015). “Interventions in bicycle infrastructure,
lessons from Dutch and Danish cases”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 10.July, pp. 403–
412. issn: 23521465. doi: 10.1016/j.trpro.2015.09.090. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.trpro.2015.09.090.
Vejdiktoratet (2019). Elcykling i Danmark Analyserapport. Tech. rep.
— (n.d.). Viden om ydelser - Mastra. url: https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/side/viden-om-
ydelser-mastra.
Via Traﬁk (2019). Speed pedelecs p˚a supercykelstier. Tech. rep.
Wardman, Mark, Miles Tight, and Matthew Page (2007). “Factors inﬂuencing the propensity to
cycle to work”. In: Transport Research Part A 41. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2006.09.011. url:
www.elsevier.com/locate/tra.
Ziemke, Dominik, Simon Metzler, and Kai Nagel (2017). “Modeling bicycle traﬃc in an agent-based
transport simulation”. In: Procedia Computer Science 109, pp. 923–928. issn: 18770509. doi:
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.424. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.424.
55
==PAGE:57==
Appendices
A
Data
Table A1: The three diﬀerent variants of imputed income, [t. DKK]
Min.
1st Qu.
Median
Mean
3rd Qu.
Max.
1
0
108
235
271
380
5 000
2
0
108
233
275
380
3 500
3
0
108
240
278
380
11 000
Observed
0
140
300
320
420
80 000
B
Methodology
Table A2: Table over value-of-time for diﬀerent income groups
Personal Income [103 DKK/year]
Value-of-time [DKK/min]
0
0.771
0-100
0.816
100-200
0.997
200-300
1.178
300-400
1.359
400-500
1.539
500-600
1.720
600-700
1.901
700-800
2.082
800-1000
2.353
1000-
2.896
C
Forecasting
Table A3: The percentage decrease in average zone-to-zone travel time,
comparison between base network and Scenario 3 network over varying
mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-3.8
-4.3
-5.7
-5.6
-7.0
-8.6
-7.9
-9.3
-10.9
Mix2
-3.8
-5.1
-5.1
-6.5
-8.1
-7.4
-8.8
-10.4
Mix3
-3.7
-3.7
-5.1
-6.7
-6.1
-7.5
-9.0
Mix4
-3.7
-5.1
-6.7
-6.1
-7.5
-9.0
Mix5
-3.7
-5.3
-4.6
-6.1
-7.7
Mix6
-3.7
-3.0
-4.5
-6.1
Mix7
-3.7
-5.1
-6.7
Mix8
-3.7
-5.3
Mix9
-3.6
Number of trips
A1
==PAGE:58==
Table A4: The percentage increase in number of bicycle trips, ∆T 1M
Bike, between
base network and Scenario 1 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 1
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
0.66
1.40
3.49
3.48
5.70
8.32
7.23
9.69
12.65
Mix2
0.66
2.74
2.73
4.93
7.54
6.45
8.89
11.83
Mix3
0.67
0.66
2.81
5.37
4.31
6.70
9.58
Mix4
0.67
2.82
5.37
4.31
6.70
9.58
Mix5
0.68
3.18
2.14
4.48
7.30
Mix6
0.69
-0.33
1.96
4.71
Mix7
0.67
2.98
5.76
Mix8
0.69
3.40
Mix9
0.70
Table A5: The percentage increase in number of bicycle trips, ∆T 2M
Bike between
base network and Scenario 2 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 2
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
2.59
3.36
5.54
5.52
7.84
10.61
9.44
12.04
15.20
Mix2
2.60
4.77
4.76
7.06
9.80
8.65
11.23
14.36
Mix3
2.66
2.65
4.90
7.59
6.46
8.99
12.06
Mix4
2.65
4.90
7.59
6.46
8.99
12.06
Mix5
2.72
5.35
4.24
6.72
9.72
Mix6
2.81
1.73
4.14
7.08
Mix7
2.75
5.19
8.15
Mix8
2.84
5.74
Mix9
2.97
Decrease in market share for cars
Table A6: Change in market share for cars, ∆bT 3M
Car, in Scenario 3 compared to
base. [%]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-0.8
-0.9
-1.4
-1.4
-1.8
-2.4
-2.1
-2.6
-3.2
Mix2
-0.8
-1.2
-1.2
-1.7
-2.2
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
Mix3
-0.8
-0.8
-1.2
-1.8
-1.6
-2.0
-2.6
Mix4
-0.8
-1.2
-1.8
-1.6
-2.0
-2.6
Mix5
-0.8
-1.3
-1.1
-1.6
-2.2
Mix6
-0.8
-0.6
-1.1
-1.7
Mix7
-0.8
-1.3
-1.9
Mix8
-0.8
-1.4
Mix9
-0.8
Increase in average trip length by bike
A2
==PAGE:59==
Table A7: The percentage increase in average trip length by bike, d
AD
1M
Bike,
between base and Scenario 3 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 1
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
0.32
0.81
2.21
2.17
3.61
5.25
4.52
6.03
7.75
Mix2
0.32
1.71
1.67
3.10
4.74
4.01
5.51
7.23
Mix3
0.32
0.28
1.69
3.30
2.58
4.06
5.75
Mix4
0.32
1.73
3.34
2.62
4.10
5.79
Mix5
0.31
1.90
1.19
2.65
4.32
Mix6
0.30
-0.39
1.04
2.68
Mix7
0.31
1.75
3.40
Mix8
0.30
1.93
Mix9
0.29
Table A8: The percentage increase in average trip length by bike, d
AD
2M
Bike,
between base and Scenario 2 network for varying mixes. [%]
Base
Scenario 2
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
1.90
2.39
3.80
3.76
5.22
6.88
6.14
7.66
9.40
Mix2
1.89
3.30
3.26
4.70
6.36
5.62
7.13
8.87
Mix3
1.88
1.84
3.27
4.90
4.17
5.66
7.37
Mix4
1.88
3.31
4.94
4.21
5.70
7.41
Mix5
1.87
3.48
2.76
4.23
5.92
Mix6
1.85
1.15
2.60
4.26
Mix7
1.86
3.32
4.99
Mix8
1.84
3.49
Mix9
1.83
Decrease in car driver-kilometers
Table A9: Real decrease in total number of car driver-kilometres, ∆D1M
Car, in Scenario 1. [km×103]
Base
Scenario 1
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-4,802
-13,164
-36,470
-36,551
-60,739
-88,699
-77,517
-103,272
-133,063
Mix2
-4,807
-28,113
-28,195
-52,383
-80,343
-69,160
-94,915
-124,707
Mix3
-4,853
-4,935
-29,123
-57,083
-45,900
-71,655
-101,447
Mix4
-4,820
-29,008
-56,967
-45,785
-71,540
-101,332
Mix5
-4,862
-32,822
-21,639
-47,394
-77,186
Mix6
-4,905
6,278
-19,477
-49,269
Mix7
-4,828
-30,583
-60,375
Mix8
-4,862
-34,654
Mix9
-4,895
Table A10: Real decrease in total number of car driver-kilometres, ∆D2M
Car, in Scenario 2. [km×103]
Base
Scenario 2
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-25,981
-34,459
-58,170
-58,162
-82,757
-111,174
-99,650
-125,813
-156,062
Mix2
-26,102
-49,813
-49,806
-74,400
-102,818
-91,294
-117,456
-147,705
Mix3
-26,553
-26,546
-51,140
-79,558
-68,033
-94,196
-124,445
Mix4
-26,430
-51,025
-79,442
-67,918
-94,081
-124,330
Mix5
-26,879
-55,296
-43,772
-69,935
-100,184
Mix6
-27,379
-15,855
-42,018
-72,267
Mix7
-26,961
-53,124
-83,373
Mix8
-27,403
-57,652
Mix9
-27,894
A3
==PAGE:60==
Table A11: Real decrease in total number of car driver-kilometres, ∆D3M
Car, in Scenario 3. [km×103]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-41,425
-50,039
-74,130
-74,123
-99,111
-127,981
-116,274
-142,853
-173,582
Mix2
-41,683
-65,774
-65,767
-90,754
-119,624
-107,918
-134,497
-165,225
Mix3
-42,514
-42,506
-67,494
-96,364
-84,657
-111,236
-141,965
Mix4
-42,391
-67,379
-96,249
-84,542
-111,121
-141,850
Mix5
-43,233
-72,103
-60,396
-86,975
-117,704
Mix6
-44,186
-32,479
-59,058
-89,787
Mix7
-43,585
-70,164
-100,893
Mix8
-44,444
-75,172
Mix9
-45,414
Consumer Surplus
Table A12: Consumer surplus for Scenario 1, CS1MSMb, over varying mixes.
[m. DKK/year]
Base
Scenario 1
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
54
54
55
55
56
57
56
57
58
Mix2
53
54
54
55
56
55
56
57
Mix3
52
51
52
53
52
53
54
Mix4
51
52
53
52
53
54
Mix5
50
50
50
50
51
Mix6
48
47
48
48
Mix7
48
48
49
Mix8
46
47
Mix9
44
Table A13: Consumer surplus for Scenario 2, CS2MSMb, over varying mixes.
[m. DKK/year]
Base
Scenario 2
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
214
216
221
220
226
233
229
236
246
Mix2
212
217
216
221
228
224
231
240
Mix3
206
206
210
216
213
218
225
Mix4
206
210
215
212
218
224
Mix5
200
205
202
206
212
Mix6
194
192
195
200
Mix7
195
199
204
Mix8
189
194
Mix9
183
A4
==PAGE:61==
D
Low-speed results
Table A14: Consumer surplus for Scenario 3, CS3MSMb, for low-speed model
over varying mixes. [m. DKK/year]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
149
151
156
157
163
171
168
176
187
Mix2
148
153
154
160
168
164
172
182
Mix3
146
146
151
158
156
162
170
Mix4
146
151
158
156
162
171
Mix5
144
150
148
153
161
Mix6
142
140
145
151
Mix7
143
148
155
Mix8
141
147
Mix9
139
Decrease in car-driver kilometers
Table A15: Real decrease in total number of car driver-kilometres, D3M
Car, in Scenario 3 for low-speed
model. [km×103]
Base
Scenario 3
Mix1
Mix2
Mix3
Mix4
Mix5
Mix6
Mix7
Mix8
Mix9
Mix1
-16,821
-25,347
-49,014
-49,206
-73,786
-102,216
-91,039
-117,245
-147,577
Mix2
-17,002
-40,669
-40,861
-65,441
-93,871
-82,694
-108,900
-139,232
Mix3
-17,507
-17,699
-42,279
-70,709
-59,532
-85,738
-116,071
Mix4
-17,510
-42,090
-70,520
-59,343
-85,549
-115,881
Mix5
-18,035
-46,466
-35,288
-61,494
-91,827
Mix6
-18,644
-7,467
-33,673
-64,006
Mix7
-18,403
-44,609
-74,941
Mix8
-18,965
-49,298
Mix9
-19,617
A5
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
Nomenclature
Table A16: An overview of the length of the base and scenario networks
Name
Status
Length [km]
Total Length [km]
Base
Existing
162
162
Scenario 1
Under construction
76
238
Scenario 2
Planned 2018 - 2030
436
674
Scenario 3
Planned 2030 - 2045
75
749
Table A17: The nine mixes of markets share for bicycle types.[%]
Bicycle Type
Mix
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Regular bicycle
95
89.5
85
74.5
70
65
49.5
45
40
Electric bicycle
4.5
10
10
25
25
25
50
50
50
Speed pedelec
0.5
0.5
5
0.5
5
10
0.5
5
10
Table A18: Mixes applied on the networks in case study
Base
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Mix
Mix2
Mix5
Mix5
Mix5
Market shares
Reg. bike [%]
89.5
70
70
70
E-bike [%]
10
25
25
25
S pedelec[%]
0.5
5
5
5
Table A19: Notations for variables and results
Notation
Explanation
Range
S
Scenario
{0, 1, 2, 3}, 0 = Base
M
Mix
{1 - 9},
n
Observation
m
Mode
i
Origin zone
j
Destination zone
q
Bike type
s
Speed type
wq
Weight for bicycle type, corresponds to market
share in assumed mix
See market shares for mixes
ws
Weight for speed type, constant
Slow:25%, Medium: 50%, Fast: 25%
P SM
nijm
Model predictions for observation n, travelling from
i to j by m, in scenario S and mix M
bT SM
ijm
Predicted number of model observations from i to j,
by m, in scenario S and mix M
bT SM
m
Predicted total number of observations using mode
m in scenario S and mix M
bDSM
m
Predicted total distance for mode m in scenario S
and mix M
DSM
m
Predicted real total distance for mode m in scenario
S and mix M
d
AD
SM
m
Predicted average distance for mode m in scenario
S and mix M
T Obs
ij
Observed real travel matrix, from LTM
T SM
ij
Predicted real travel matrix in scenario S and mix M
CSSMsMb
Consumer surplus in scenario S with Ms on
scenario network, and Mb on base network
A21
